                     1.  Become familiar with broad literature.
                     2.  Evaluate proposals
                            a.  Light--Flash Blindness
                            b.  Impact
                     3.  Biomedical assistance to
                            a.  Toxicity of compounds
                            b.  Other ( I )
                     4.  Occas ional quick response capability to provide best guess
                         2     0
                        answers to specific questions.
                     5. F easibility of electric shock as a system--not hardware but
                        the effect on humans.
                     6. Feasibility of any impact system designed -'Uo bring about
                        unconsciousness with low lethality risk.  Considerin@7--
                                                                            z@
                   2     ciifferences in range, angle of impact, position of head at
                        impact, area of impact, etc.
                     7.  New concepts for non-lethal incapacitation
                     3.  Field tests--anlmals (,?
                                                                              cr
                                                                     Approvei
                                                8                             f FIR,
                                                                     I)at a

                  (la)   Bluebook
                  (1)    Get clearance on
                  (2)    Get cover on non-hazardous          crowd or riot control (particularly the
                         sponsor for program)
                  (4)  Travel - depends on extent to which I asked them to visit other contractors.'
                  (5)    Dogs - Animals are available and cared for anyway - we are not paying
                         .Lor what we 2don't use.
                  (5)    Consultant Fees - those cited are for clincians from clinic                                 for
                         instance and hospital - charge by hour (not taking care of patients).
                                      Lpersonnel are on salary and consultant fees would be minimal.
                  (6)    Of the "Review Proposal" is not sufficient for the Bluebook                              ill idhone
                         wh1at's OK.  If necessary send signed copy.

