                                                 BIO-PO%VER
                                              RNTERIM REPORT
                                               October 15. 1966
                                              Contract
                                                 Prepared by.-

                                                 TA 13 LE OF' c o.N,-rE' iT S
                                                                                               P! ste
                                 STATE,VENT OF OBJECTRVES                                          I
                           IL    SUMNIA RY                                                         2
                           M     CE14E2RAL I)ISCUSSION                                              3
                                 A.    Directly Obtained Electricity                               3
                                       1.   Neurornuscular Potentials                              3
                                            a.    Nerve Potentials                                 4
                                            b,    Muscle Potentials                                5
   2                                         C.    Cardiac Potentials                               6
                                       2.   birect Current Syste=is                                7
                                            &.    Physiologic'al Electrode CeU                     7
                                            b.    Fue'6 Cell                                    11
                                 B.    Therr2noelectric Converter                                12
                                 C.    Mechanoelectric Converter                                14
                                       1.   Sources                                             14
                                       2.   Transducers                                         19
                                            a.    Piezoelectric Crystals                        19
                                 5           b.    Permanent Maonet Generators                   24
                                       3,   Previous Work                                       25
                          ,rV.   BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                   28

        AM
                                F oBjsCTr4ES
                      STATEMENT                         lie area of
                                is study is to Sur.Vey past wor@ in tur,-, develop
                      The olject of th Cal power as reported i@n the literat
                  body,pro(Il,iced electri I ods and approaches which ha.ve
           2                      e various meth        information in
                  a,% urderstandng o"th     and present this
                        gested as Ossible sourcess rls the geno-ral probleta
                  been Sug             directed tO"-v3,
                   a useful foL-.M. -mis report ir- electroilic devices, SUCII
                   ,Df providing elpctri@al poer to implanted lessthan 200 micro,
                                        @s requiring
                         cial cardialc pacerrLaXe 9 oty self cOnt2- iied internal
                   as artili                  E@,ete
                       for an indefinite time from a
                    S.ystern.

                                                                                         AIML
                                  IT-.
                                        A general literature review was first undertaken to both dis-
                                  cover  previous  experimental  work  and  to  gather  general   impressions
                                  of thinking on this subject.  The review  indicated  that  there  were  few
             2                     well documented conclusions available  and  that  although  a  fresh  start
                                  rnight be duplicative, it is ne'eded  for  a  systematic  study.  Conceiv-
                                  able sources were listed  and  each  has  been  -briefly  considered  from
                                  the physiological and  instrumental  viewpoints.  In  trying  to  evaluate
                                  potential usefulness of a source  it  w2as  sometirnes  necessary,  to  form
                                  conceptual designs of mechanical s@steins which could utilize that
                                  source. Comixfents  on  these  designs  are  included  in  the  discussion
                                  as contextual information because theiillustrate those aspects of
                                  the systems which were consider@d and the design problems en-
               2                   counter4d, not because t@ese designi. are fe'Lt to be the proper
                                  .solution. We concur  with  recent  statements  'dy  investigators  active
                                  in experimental work that  the  physiological  Galvanic  @.-eU  and  mech-
                                  anoelectric conversion are the t,.Yo most promising systems, although
                                  much work Is ne2cessary before either is useful for practical pur-poses.
                                  Throughout this 6tudy we repeatedly encountered unanswered questions
                                  of '.ne possible effects of biological adaptation on the  total  implanted
                                  system.  These effects need not be entirely neg-ative.  Adaption in
                                  a direction tending to increase power output is a possibility deserving
                                  of serious attention.

            AIM==
                                        R,ENERAL DISCIIS.SIO".1
                                        A.    Directly Obtained Electricity
                                              slnce our  goal  is  electricity  prodvced  from  an  energy
                                                                                             ally and  the
                                        within the body. the si2,-iiplest system instrument
                                 sou.-ce
                                 first which should be evaluated is the direct electrical tap.  The
                                 systems under consideration in this section are all those that contain
                                 electrodes that are in physical cont'act  with  the  biological  environ-
                                 me-it and in which electrical potentials betweerk elec2trodes can be
                                 measured.  These potentials are due to. or at least intirne.,,ely
                                 associated with,  time  and  space  variations  in  ionic  concentrations
                                 and flow.  The ultimate descriptions and explanations and definitions
                                 of these potentials are within the science of irreversible therrno-
                                 dynamic2s and the su@ject of cons7iOerable controversy.  (19) For
                                        r-pose of this discussior, we Yiill  gene.rally consider these
                                 the   pu
                                 potentials operationally, that is, according to what you do to obtain
                                 a -neasurable potential and the characteristics of that potential.
    2                                            1.     Neuromuscular Pote    ntials
                                                                                -aical electrochemical phenomena
                                                       The most   studied biolc.
                                                     'cular action potentials.  At the cellular level micro-
                                   are the neuromus
                                   electrodes o2f several microns    diameter inserted through neuron or
                                   rmuscle cell membrane indicate potentials of tens of millivolts between
                                   points within the cytoplasm and between cytoplasrn and extracell@ilar
                                   ,-Luid.  The time course of variations -.n these potentials is from 2
                                   millisecond to hours.  These 'Ornembrane potentials" in themselves
                                   are of no use for our purposes becau    se of the fantastically low currents
                                   and shrrt life of a cell damaged by p  erforation of its rne-nbrane.  But

                         ASk
                         Nam
                                                                      associated with the Surrlrnated
                                                         r ph,2nomena.
                              the    gross    ellr2l'Ilula          . e cell secti0fis  in nerve and
                                          ofthousanas 2   of nearby ac@"v
                              effects                                              a rnetal wire QC disc
                               muscle bundles deserve Consideration.  Whell          tlais" are ob served
                                                         es if compound action poten
                               is  placed  near   a   nerv . and another placed in the body, and wlerl
 2                              between    that    electrod                  " is observed.
                                a  muscle   is-ueedo   the it electromYOgran,
                                                    2.     I;er-ve Potentials
                                                                                                 an energy
                                                              e use of neural electricity as
               2                                            Th                         grounds that dra,.vi-ng
                                                         issed as pot feasible on Lhe
                                         can   be    disrn                                       ne@s and di-%-
                                 source                                         itable    rnernbra
                                                   2      stimulation of the exc         I        ra observing
                                 curtent                                            results    fro
                                         s   will   cau;;e          is Conclusion
                                                         unction.  'M                                  ural
                                 rup-tion  of  norrnal   f                       d is the result o2f ne
                                                                      is produce
                                                                      %          -               i Curren,., Eau
                                 that whatever electric.al energ    at-                   lectrica            St
                                                         ion) and th   that level of e
                                  activity  (by   assurnpt          Use rtimulation since    it was generated
                                         essity be sufficient to ca                              Way to avoid
                                  of nec                                           rhere   is   no
                                  in   order   to   produc e (natural) stimulation'              en the voltages
                                                            e  electro2de  whicl@  supplied  it  wh
                                   r,,turning current 11 i-h                                  aniunk diodes, a-nd
                                                                         lnini.gnurn for germ
                                                         than the . 4 Volt
                                   jrvolved    are    less                            0             i2t seems
                                                                                        ill differ.
                                                                    nt distributions  w
                                   while the  twO.electr6de curre .    -  .     units  -will be stin-julated.  The
                                                                    east some
                                                                  2                               ,so, r
                                    reasonable to exvect   that at I                                   ince neural
                                                                                 desirable.  @ I
                                         of even a few units in the   pNS is un                   esistance of
                                    loss                       er of  100 millivolt, a source r
                2                    potentials are  of the old   -               tts.  This requirernent is not
                                                                 - 200 rnicronva
                                    .12 ohm is needed t( obtaln                          npIL-, the, input "'n'
                                     cornpatible withthe source.  Consider for all"
                                                    7a              amplifiers tY-P ically required to rneasure
                                     pedances (1(  ohm) Of the
                                                         action potentials..
                                     nerve        compound

                       Aift@
                                                          -5-
                                              b.    Muscle'Potentials
                                                    With muscles the situation differs in several
                               respects @hat make power pick up frorn this systern at least COn-
                               ceivable. Namely, the volume of musdle is large 2compared with
                               neural tissue and stimulation of a7 few units should not seriously
                               disrupt normal function.  The large niuscle areas may allow many
                               electrodes to be used simultaneously in order to provide a lower
                               electrical source resistance.  For example. if one pair of electrodes
                               prcvides a source resistance of 500 ohm, 402 pair will provide 12
                               ohm.  In order to utilize this low volt@-5:e ac rxource a minia@.urp- trans-
                               former can be used to step up 'le voltage befe@:-e rectisication. From
                               a power standpoint it shou7id I."@;'fiore efficient to u--@- one transformer
                               and recti2fier with each pair c,,.' eii'@'7c-.-trodes and s-,irn -.,e dc outputs.
                               Sir.ce skeletal muscle EMG signals <-,ontain most of -.@heir power in
                                                                                                     3'
                               frequencies above 100 cps, submlniatvre traa_sforrners (i-, oz. v.2 in.
                               can be used.  Answers to important biological questions were not found
                               in -the literature. No reports describing investigation of EMG signals
                               as power sources were discovhred, although use of EMG signals for
                               controlpurposeshavebeerkfrequentlystudied.  Whetherornotalow
                               en,ough source resistance can be achieved and main2tained and what
                               'type of electrode and implantation is best are questions which will
                               probably have to be answered by experiment.  Careful technique may,
                               prevent electrodes embedded in muscles performing large movements
                               from causing irritation and pain but this will ;also require study.  Judginer
                                                             1                                          to
                               from the experience of clinical workers with implanted cardiac pacemakers.
                               small electrodes can be tolerated but dislodg-3ment and lead breakage
                               rray be serious problems.

               Ann
                                              t
                                                     Card@ a Potentials
                                                          ta
                                                     The strong rhythmic contractions of the myo-
                               cardium attract irhmediate attention but the characte ristic s of its elec
                                                2               ar difficulties.  Unlike skeletal muscle
                               trical potentials present particul
                               v.-hich maintains contraction with a high frequency train of "spikes".
                               car-diac muscle fibers depolarize and repolarize only once per heart-
                               beat.  Thus, the energy is contained mostly in low frequency compoll-
                               ents (1-20 cps).- Since the contraction of all areas of the muscle is
                               synchronized, large electrode areas can be used without the losses
                               which would be associated with large electroces on skeletal rnuscle.
                               (Current from active non-synchronized   skeletal muscle fibers could
                               pass t-iru a large electrode to inactive'tissue without passing to the
       2                        second electroae of the pair.) B@t while this allows only one  tr.ans -
                               former to be used on the heart withone pair of large electrodes, trans-
                               for7ners which are designed for very low frequencies are relatively lar Ye.
                               hegvy and inefficient.  Recardless of the differences in waveform, the
                               ECG on the he2art is less than 100 mV (possibly only 10 mV) and thus
                               a maximurn source 'r@'esistanc@ of 1.2 ohm is again required for 200
                               UV,' power yi&ld (hssuming the 100 rnV peak figure). TJnless a radically
                               i,mproved electrode material is developed this resistance is not likely
                               to be achieved.  Effective so0urce resistance figures for common elec-
                               trode materials directly on muscle have not been found in the literature,
                               and an experiment appears necessary to determine what resistance can
                               be easily obtained and how this ml-,ht change -.vith time.

                                                             -7-
                                            2.    Direct Current Systems
                                                  These systems are all those that produce electron
                                flow in one direction only between the two electrodes.  This is un-
                                like the neuromuscular potential electrode system in which a
                                capacitor wo2uld be placed in the circuit to insure that no net charge
                                flows from one electrode to the othe.r.  Ir. the neuromuscular system
                                the electrical energy or interest is " I#ernatin& current" in that charge
                                flo@vs from electrode A to electrode j3 and then, milliseconds later.
                                returns to A.  In the neuromuscular electrode system net current flow
                                would provide no liseful work and undesired reactions might accumulate
                                products on or near the electrodes, that result in "polarization" and/or
                                electrodedeterioration',,vhlch interferes with the desired action.  This
                                type of electrode activity, howe.ver, c-in- become the desired 'activity in
                               2 direct c-urrent'systems.
                                                  a.    Physiolocrical Electr-,@de Cell
                                                        The Galvanic cell in its simplest and classical
                                forn-t consists only in two difierent metals (cr other conductors) dipping
                                into a common.tont4@,solution! An electric p@tential, characteristic
                  2              of the metals. 'iernperature, ionic species and concentration, can be
                                measured between the non-immzrsed portioris of the two metal
                                electrodes.  Since the fluids existing within the body are ionic solu-
                                tions inter-electrode potentials can be prgdl@ced by inserting two
                                dissimilar conductors anywhere.  Because of the2 complexity or the
                                body flu,&d composition, variation in compos:tion at different points,
                                induced efrects from the presence of foreign mate@ial, presence of many
                                membranes with unk-now.,i properties, active processes, etc. , etc. , the
                                actual chemical reactiot-is and inter-electrode potential can not be pre-
  4                                cted, in rzkct such potentials are not strictly defined.  (Nims, p. 3).

                                                                                    Ankh,
                                                                    two general types Of reaction
                                     Nve can consider that there are
                                                                        The first, which we will
                                 which occur with in,&planted electrodes.
                                 call typ2e i, is like that iri the classical Galvanic cell described above
                                 in which one or both electrode materials enters into the reaction and
                                 b-2comes irreversibly altered or lost. The second type of - reaction
                                 is possible when membranes are present and the chemical environ-
                                 ment differs at the two electrodes. In this type 2 reaction, which i2n
                                 its simplest form is the classical concentration cell, irreversible change
                                 to the electrode surfaces need not occur and the electrodes need not be
                                 dissimilar. The rate of the -chemical reactions may be much improved
                                 by dissimilar surfaces@ however, for exampli! by catalytic action, in-
                                 creased effective area, inducem2ent of local environmental change, etc.
                                 This second type of activity can be con! idered as a fuel cell with the
                                 phydiological system malp,@).,ning i-11 the reactants and removing the'
                                 end products.  A special ir p-.ication'of the type 2 system is when sirnuar
                                 electrodes of "Iner-t metals" or of 2"non-polarizable" liquid fuled tubes
                                 are used in conjunction with very hi,,rh impeda-nce voltage measur.Lng cir-
                                 cuits which insure that the potgntial chexnicalreactions do not occur
                                 :at the electrode's. T@is arrangernent is used for investigating so called-
                         2        natural de potentibil gradients within and on the surface of the body (4).
                                 Such measurements necessarily rnust draw virtually no power from-tfie
                                 chemical energy sources responsiblbi for the electrode potentials. for
                                 as soon ar current is drawn reactions occur and the natural concentrations
                                 change.  Thus any dc 2current producing electrode generator scheme use-
                                 ful- for our purposes will have inter-electrode potentials which are more
                                 or less unnatural physiologically. That is. the potential difference be-
                                 tween electrodes of any type drawing current will be different from that
                                 rneasure,J between "non-p6larizable" electrodes drawing 0no current, and
                                 the local chemical environment surroundingthe electrodes maybe grossly

                                dl(ferent.  ]@or these reasons- the type 1 systern in which electrode
                                mat-2rial change occurs and the type 2 system in which it need not
                                are considered here as two special cases of  the  general  physiological
                                electrode cell system.
                                    The general case or which the type 1 and 2 systems are ex-
      2                          amples, is when dissimilar metals, which produce a potential when
                                dipped into a common ionic solution,  are  placed  in  a  nonhomogeneous
                                environment that produces a potential between :simnar electrodes.
                                This is probably a fair description of the situation prevailing in the
                                electrode materia-1, electrode placement comb-2Lnations with which
                                Dr. Tohn Konik'off and others produce the  best  results,  The  Konikoff
                                work is a significant source of e'xperimental  data  and  has  stimulated
                                much of the recent intere st in the,yhysiological  electrode  cell  power
                                source.  For these reasons a brief summ   ary of the  work  reported  in
                         2       reference 12 is included here.  The  reader is referred to the ori&al
                                paper for details.
                                     John Konikoff and  Luthe.r  Reynolds  were  the  principal  workers
                                at the General  t:lectric  Companylq  Space  Sciences  Laboratory   under
                                a c-ontraet with 14ASA in 1963 - 64 to investiora t-e the@ use of what is
             2                   re:erred to here as physiolocdeal electrode cell- potentials as a
                                biologically  derived  power  source.  Many  combinations  of  electrode
                                materials in several anatomical locations in several species of labor-
                                atory anirnals were tried. Their final choice  of  electrode  material.%
                                was "high speed steel (751@ Fe. 6179 2Cr,. 1819 W, .341a V, .719 C)" and a
                                specially prepared  platinum platinurn-black" combinition.. The fihal
                                c@.oice of location was as follows,      the PPb electrode was located in
                                the abdominal cavity dorsal to the peritoneal membrane -- and HSS situited
                                @-.ibeutaneously 8but physically adjacent to the abdominal incision.    The

                         Agak
                  7           longest conlinuous implant was'123 days, electrodes and sites were
                              as above.  'The animal was ;r. rabbit, and a coristant resistive load of
                              10, 000 oh-i.-i was applied between electrodes.  After 15 days the output
                              stabilized and thereafter rema2ined at 24 microwatts 'and . 5 volt.  The
                              highest power reported in short term studies was 308 microwatt.  ITo
                              ne-m work from either Konikoff or Reynolds has been published since
                              1954.  Telephone conversations with both men indicate that work is
                              co-itinuing, and that recent improvements in the platinum-black elec-
             2                 trode material have increased the po,.ver output threefold for the same
                              electrode area. - Reynolds who is now at Hahnemann'Medical College,
                              Philadelpiii3 reports that 2 00 mi.c r6wal,.ts -has'been obtained when each
                                                   2
                              elecirode is of'1/2 in  area.  2This ele@trode power generat,.oti scheme
                              .has the advantages. "according t@6the o'riginatcrs, of simple surgical
                              pr:3cedure and no harmful tissue @eaction or loss of output at least for
                              4 months in the ono- loig term rabbit experiment.
                                    Accordini to the data in the Koni,koff report and especially !2he
                              recent report of Strohl et. al: (29), wh'en "biologically iner-t" metals
                              such as plattnurn and type 31 S., stainless are iinplant@-d, power levels
                              greater than 10 uW have not been obtained and the output dr-ops signifi-
                              cantly below this after a few days.  Strohl's comments on the inevitable
                     2         growth of a fibrous membrane around implanted electrodes suagests that
                              the electrodes become isolated from the original, diss"ilar ionic
                              ,@-i,ivironments as this membrane grows.   The better po%ver outputs and
                              longevity have been obtained in coniuncti-on with an electrode which
                              actively reacts with species present in the extracellula3r fluids.  Even
                              when covered with (hypothetical) cells tending to maintain identical ionic
                              concentrations around the two electrodes, a reactive e'Lecti-ode can
                              continue to provide rurrent.  In evaluating an electrode cell svstem con-
                             -tainbig reactive electrodes importint conside:-ations are toxicity of_

                                                                                                         LA
                            P-oducts and deterioration of performance with time.  As Strohl
                            notes, Faraday's first law predicts the electrode weight  loss  due  to
                            ionic solution when the electrode reactions are  known  quantitatively.
                            For example, .91 of iron will be needed to supply 100 uA for 1
                            year. But at least as important are the hard to  predict  effects  such
                            as loss of effective surface area "catalyst poison-ing", uneven surface
                            deteric>ra',ion and long term local tlssue reaction. Li conclusion,  it
                            appe ars that there is a reasonable possibility that physiological elec-
                            trode cel2ls can provide 200 uW for extended periods, but careful
                            long term studies.and an understanding of the ac4ive phenomena,
                            which, hopefully, will provide the @asis for @ptirnizing the  electrode
                            materials, are-necessary.  But the s'  ple surgery in low risk areas
                            which has been use,@, the mechallics -'n--o moving part2s, the non-
                            dependence on any bodily motion. 'the inherent freedom froin en-
                                                               -t term  results  already  achieved,
                            capsulation problems, and the shor
                            combine to make this a most promising system at this time.
                                           b,,   Fuel Ceii
                                                "Sophistic2ated direct current systems have
                            been speculated on for producin-, relatively large quantities of
                            electrical power for running proposed artificial tear-ts.  These systems
                            are usually referred to as fuel cells and usually are considered in ref-
                            erenca to known chemical energy sources such as glucose- or ATP.  These
                            systems are very appeal2ing, largely because the proposed energy source
                            is fai.-ly well understood.  Molecular energy yields. available concen-
                            trations and naturally occuring reactions can be stated.  The develop-
                            ment of physical systems to t%tilize these sources then'appears to be a
                            problem amenable to present technological capability since fhe avail-
                            abl8e raw materials -and necessary operations are knonvn. at least

                                                              -12 -
                                 in broad outline.  This is in.contrast to the simpler Galvanic ceU
                                 sy-tems discussed earlier in which the present -qtate of the  art  ha$
                                 been reached largely by trial and error without  benefit  of  thorough
                                 un:lerstanding of the detailed  processes  involved.  Ap2proaching  the
                                 problem from basic principles and proceeding in accordance with
                                 established theory wiU no doubt achieve  practical  success  in  time.
                                 The National Institutes of I-lealth recently circulated a Reque:it For
                                 Proposal to,undertake feasibility studies of in- plalnted biological
                        2         fuel CeUs. When these initial studies are completed we will have
                                 a statement of the problem and outline of needed research.  For
                                 the immediate future, ho-wever, the simpler ;It  proposed  system  is.
                                 the greater appfars its chance of success.
                                      S.    Thermoelectric Converter'
                                            Temperature gradi2enti    within the body theoretically
                                 can be exploited as a source of electrical  energy.  In  recent  years
                                 considerable research on thermoelectric compos'&tions for use with
                                 nuclear reactor: heat sources has produ-ced materials with thermoelectric
                                 properties much improved ov@r those of conventional t,%ermocouples.
                             2    For example, a' conventional copper-constantin couple will produce 23
                                 microvolt per fahrenheit Zegree temperature difference while a material
                                                                                                         0
                                 of Bismuth-Antirnony-Talluride composition produces 77      microvolt/F
                                 (II, 8).  Simple calculat2ions using this second figure indicate that with
                                      0
                                 a 5 F  temperature difference and I ohm resistance for every element
                                 2500 elements connected in series will yield 200 uW at  .  5  volt.  A
                                 Japanese group (32) has published a report of a 150 element thermoelectric
                                 generator for use on the ext7ernal body surface.  Their device used the
                                 Bi-Sb-Te rnate rial and the size of the thermoelectric array appears.to be
                                  bout 2. 5 crn x lcm x.-Scrn,  The data presented in their report arehot

               .ARM="
                                                                    3-
                                    clear and well organized and therefore the following calcuiations
                                 -based on that report may, not be com
                                                                        pletely correct.  A maximum
                                    voltage of about 450 millivolt (open circuit?)2 is repoeced. 'A serie3
                                    array of 150 elements of a material producing 77 uV/F   .will   produce
                                    450 mV at a temperature difference of 39 Fo'  Since some of their
                                    work was at 10  0C (530F) air temperature with evaporating alcohol on
                                    the cold junction, this temperature difference is  possibl2e.  The  only
                                                                               2
                                    power output figure mentioned is 20 uW/cm. .  If this was obtained
                                    under conditions which produced a . 45 volt open circuit voltage and  if
                                                                                2
                                    their device contacted a si(in area of 2. 5 cin then the indicated. internal
                                                   eir devi e is 2000 ohms, oi- roughly 13 ohm per element.
                                    resistance of th       C
                                    If this resistance figure is realistic for thermopiles composed of ele-
                                    ments of 2mm x Imrzi. x 5mm s Like therf the 2500 element array mentioned
                                 2   above would produce only 1,13 of the assumed 200 uW or only 15 uW.  A
                                    total resistance of 13 ohm per element appears unnecessarily high, how-
                                    ever, according to the following calculation. - The resistivity of Bi-Sb-
                                                   -4
                                    Te is only 7 x 10  ohm - cm (8). Hence an element of the above2 dimensions
                                    should have only 17 malohrn kiter-nal resi--tailce.  Therefore the actual
                                    electrical resistance is almost entirely contributed by the contact @e-
                                    tweeft the ther-mdelement ar,.d the heat sink conductor and is largely a
                                    problem in technique.  According to reference 26. contac2t resistivity
                                    ill elements used in thermoelectric power ginerators rriay vary between
                                                               2
                                                                          ,her fiaure indicates a contact re-
                                    3 and 4500 microohm - cm       The hi.
                                    sistance of .23 ohm for an area of .02 cm  and,  since  the2re  are  two
                                    contacts per element, a total contact resistance of . S ohm for elements
                                    the size of those in the Japanese device.  This last calculation was the
                                    basis for our original assumption of I ohm per element.
                                          The conclusion we reach is that a 2500 element array operating
                                                                           7   0                                2
                                    between a temperature difference of 5 F      with a surface area of 42 cm

                                at each heat sink and a depth of .5cm will produce 200 uW at 5
                                volt.  By comparison, 25 cm 3 of medical grade mercury cells
                                (S ';%Iallory RM CC - IW) (20) has a capacity Df 8 AH -,which.
                                r-.eglecting age derating, will supply 200 uW for 5 years at 1. 4
                               2 to 10 volt.  Since the failure of any one of 5000 contact points ia
                                t'ne series connected array will cause system failui,e, and since a
                                5 F0temperature diiference between two 42 cm   2areas.. 5 cm apart
                                does not naturally and reliably exist within the body, Lhe thermo-
                                couple systezn is considered 2to be not corrpe.titive-..ivith conventional
                                batteries for at implanted power source.
                                  C.    Mecbarioelectric Conver-ter
                                        In this section possible. mech'an--ical energy sources w,@'ll be
                                considered  togeth.er with mechani.cal couplir-g schemes.  An arbitriry
                      2          criterion of 1 milliwatt net mechanical work in the coupling system was
                                chosen as a practical minimuri power level for a final electrical output
                                of 200  microwatt. Brief consideration-,of actual mechanical to elec-
                                trical iransducers, namely, Riezoelectric crystals and permanent
                                maomet generators, is included.  We make2 the provisional assumption
                                tn this section tkat if a mechanical system can be implan'.ed which
                                will perform I mW work, for example in winding a spring, for over
                                a year, then a transducer can be desianed to utilize this energy.  (>ther
                                han work based on electrode cell potentials all known experimental im-
                       6         :)Iant power generation has been with piezoelectric crystals.
                                         1.   Sources
                                              The obvious mechanical sources are.-
                                                    6     Voluntary muscle, joint and limb move-
                                                          ments

                                                        a   Peristalsis  (dismissable  on  grounds   of
                                                            insufficient power)
                                                        a   ftespira-.,ory systern  rib  cage   motion,
                                                            diaphragm muscle. thoracic and abdominal
                                                            to pressure variatioa"
                                                        a   Cardiovascular system - heart motion, aorta
                                                            and large artery pulse expansion, blood flo.w
                                                        a   Gross body acceler-ation (self winding watch
                                                            pr-@ncipje, "random motion power")
                                    Moven@en.ts associated with voluntary activity in some cases offer
                              large quantitie.-; of  mechanical power..' The intermittant cha racter of
                              this  :activity  m@ans,  however, t h%a.t an energy storage system muzt @e
                              included in the design to supply powl%r during periods of inactivity.
                              Rechargeable batteries are the obvious storage device, espe2cially since
                              they are designed for and requi--e relatively hil@--i current, short duty
                              cycle char&g..    These batteries require 50 to 10017a more charge current
                              than they retur@, ho:w'eve r.  l@he refore, any inte rmittant gene rato r will
                              have to supply 300-400 microwatt average elect2rical charging power if
                              the tattery-undergoes 200 micro%vatt constant drain.  It may not be un-
                              reasonab'te to dept.@nd upon or require some particular v6luntary move-
                              ment  being  performed  at  some  minimum  rate  for  many  months,  -but
                              unless a particular application requires  power  oniy  dvring  a  certain
       2                       type of activity, it seems more straightforward to couple a motion
                              generator to a continuous activity, such as respiration and blood flow,
                              in which the rate and other operational norms and limits are predictable
                              and unavoidable.

                                                                                           consider is
                                      The first continuous rnotion source which we will
                                respiration. Since the ob@ect  of  respiratory  mechanical  motion  i-S  to
                                purnp air- a fluid flo%,, system-operating on the pressure volume changes2
                                         t
                                found in th e thoracic and abdominal cavities during the respiratory cycle
                                                                            ons af quiet rest the variation
                                is an obvious possibility,.  During conditi
                                in  pressure  within  the  human  adult  thorax  is  approximately  3mm  Hg
                              2                             2
                                (4 cm R 0) or! .04 Nt/cm       At a breath rate of 30/ min, work of 2
                                         2
                                                    ath must  be  done  for  an  averaae  mechanical  power
                                millijoule per bre                                  12
                                 of I milliwatt.  If we approxirftate the phase lag to be expected be-
                                 tween pressure and volume by assuming no phase 12,g but with only
                                 one half the pressure variation.(i.e.'.q2 Ntlcm        then the-volume of
                                 fluid k'silicon oil-, gas isotonic ialine-, etc.)  which  must  be  pumped
                                                                                 x 163 Oule
   2                                                                                            s 10  cn%3.-
                                 each breath according to the relatlion PV a 2                             Since
                                 the volume calculated in this inannei is inversely proportional to breath
                                  rate and- intrathoracie' pressure. the'volume required in most experiniental
          2                        animals will be less.
                                        An elenrentari-non-diff4rential system,responsive to resplratory
                                  pres5ure variations of 3mm lig'wo'uld proba-Dly be disabled by normal
                                  atmospheric pressure variations of one or two inches of mercury. . In-
                                2   sensitivity to ambient "dc" pressure is inherent in a disferential system.
                                  however, and because the intra-abdominal -espitatory pressure variation
                                   is out of phase with the intrathoracie, two bellows, one in each cavity.
                                   .connected by a tube would comprise such a systern.  It appears that this
                                   system can provide the necessar7y mechanical energy without obvious
                                   size and weight objections.   A simple iml),antatioa procedure with a sub-
                                    cuianeous tube tunnel is conceivable, although all surgical questions as
                                     ell as those on materials, size, shape and irritation require extensive

                                                            .17-
                                  design and ex perimentation. In summary, a respiratory fluid pumping
                                  system is recommended as deserving of further attention.
                                     Direct mechani@al coupling to respiratory motion remains as
                                  a-nother possibility. The change in dimension of the rib cage an2d
                                  diaphragm are attractive. The method of coupling might be sornething
                                  working on the principle found in retracting tape measures. A cable is
                                  wound on a drum and a spring tends to keep -.he cable wound up.  if
                                  the drum package is firmly attached in some convenient location and the
                                  cable held against the under side of the diaphragm 2or in a subcutaneous
                                  tunnel around the chest with the far end of the cable attached. then the
                                  drum would rotate back and forth d4r,:ng eucl@breath.  A ratchet drive to
                                  wind a second ipring would allow for any zero position" of the cable-
                                  ex-tension with the s6cond sl>ring.driviaifthe actu2al transducer.  Perhaps
                                  placing the cable inside a silicon @ubber tube filled with silicon grease,
                                  -the tube being of the beL' ows type to'auow it to lengthen easily. would
                                  improve the sealing and tissue irritation situation.  While quantitative
                                  da-ta on the diaphragm has not. been sought, it ce r-tainly appears2 that
                                  sufficient power is available from dfapbragm inotion and also from chest
                                  expansion.  The main probler-iis are expected to be in materials, packaging
                                  and surgical technique. Apar-t from matei-ial fatigue and sealing, tissue
                                  erosion and cell destruction from too great applied pressures must be
  2                                avoided', for even livina tissue applying pressure unnaturally (e. g. an
                                  aneurysm) can erode its way through other tissue.  The experience with
                                  bone plates, wires and other prostheses which have been used for manv
                                  years shows that direct mechanical attachments to internal structures can
                                  be accomplished, however.
        9                          Cardiovascula
                                        The other continuous mechanical source is the cardiovascular systei-n.

                                The work of Doctors   Parsonnet 2-kd.Ke-iredy 4ernonstrates, at
                                least for short periods, that the expansion of the great arteries and the
                                irovement of the heart can be tapped for rriec'hanical power.  Specific
                                contmcnts on these sources are ineul'ied iii 1.1-ie discuss-,ons of tl-@eii itz-
                                periments.  In general, however, a significant design problem is con-
                                cerned with accomodating long and short term variations in the proper-
                                ties of the system being coupled to.  With the arteries some of these
                                variables are changes, whether natural or induced, in the artery cross
            2                    section, arterw wall elasticity. average blcod pressure, systolic-
                                diastolic differential pressure, postural configuration and relative
                                direction of gravity.,
                                Random i@Tot, n
                                             io
                                      Gross body acceleration   operating on a mechanical system
                             2   similar in principle to the self winding watch refers to voluntary,  motion.
                                especiauy walking, and the critirism  of  non-coniinuous  sotirces  applies.
                                The only detailed consideration of this tyste.m is found in Dr. Long's
                                article (14). The ad.@rantage of this system iz;that aU the operating  parts
                     2           can -be enclosed in a hermetically se;Lled rie-d box.  Except for the
                                weight involved this box could be attached to the diaphragm or heart to
                                take advantage of the continuo@s motio@ in these  locations.  But  in  order
                                to demonstrate that the weight is prohibitive, consider a m,,iss of M
                                kilograms being forced to move back and fo2rth over a distance of lcm
                                accordirg to the sine law at a frequency of  I  per  second.  The  rna-vimum
                                velocity achieved .vilj be Tr 162 meters/second.  Tl-.e kinetic energy at
                                             1     2.     m
                                t,lits point is i iNW        16   oule.  If we could somehow utilize all
                  2              t-iis energy each cycle,the mass for I millijoule is approximately 2kg.
                                %Vhile the force necessary to accelerate this mass Is only . 2 Nt. which

                                   could probably be provided by the diaphragm, the force necessary to
                                   support this mass against gravity is 20 Nt. which the diaphragm could
                                   not support.  The artificial heart discussants are seriously considering
                                   weights of this magnitude for long term implantation: thus we cannot
                              2     a priori dismiss a random motion system as unworkablesbut it does not
                                                                                                ies in power
                                   appear to be competitive with conventional mercury batter
                                   pe r pound.
                                              2.    Transducers
                                                    a.     Pietoelectric Crystals
       2                                                    The mechanical energy to cie-.trical energy
                                   transducer.most often considered for @se in biological power applications
                                   i!s the piezoelectric crystal.  Manufaqfured crystals of lead zirconate,
                                   lead titanate (PZI,) composition    b.ive far superior properties for p<jwer
                     2              transduction than do natural crystal@s, such as quartz and rocheue salt.
                                   These manufactured crystals are produced in a form Icnown as "ceramic
                                   bimorphs".  Quantitative data on the relevant characteristics of these
                                   petzoelectric ceramics have been developed 4s part of this study frorn
                                   ,@aorrnati2on aviilable from the Clevite Corporatio,-t (9, 10, 22).  Data of
                                   this sort are nec@ssary for evaluating the practicability and design require-
                                   rnents of this method of- power generation.
                                   Efficiency
                                         One of the inost appealing characteristics of these transducers is
                                   an attaina2ble conversion efficiency greater than 50,1*.  This efficiency
                                   refers to the ratio of net mechanical enerqr supplied to the er-istal to
                                   electrical energy supplied by the cryst'al umer optimum conditions or
                                   mounting and matching.  The simplest syst-arn for driviiig a crystal    is
                                   to have the mechani6cal source directly coupled. that is, whl-n the source
                                   (e. g. expanding aorta) moves.the crystal is deforrned.prr)portionately.

                                                                                     7
                                                             -20-
                          With this type of mechanical cot@.oling a differently defined "efficiency" La signui-
                          cant.  Net mechanical work means total work done on the crystal to deforin it
                          rninus ihe total work done by the crysta2l as it relaxius to its unstressed state,
                             00
                               F,'t)v(t) dt] -  Since with direct coupling the source has to be ca'pable of
                            0
                          supplying enough work to deform the crystal, and since as far as the ttansducer
                          is concerned any work it does on the source (d-iring the relaxation phase) is lost
          2                forever, the ratio of total work done on the crystal
                                                 flIF(t)V(ti + F(t)V(t)
                                                  0,
                          to total electrical work done by the crystal-is a rneaningful figure. The usual
                          model for these cry5tal@ is:
                                                     Ce
                          2                               N
                                       Electrical                              Mechanical
                          The Clevite literature contains tables for calculating- Ce. an electrical caoici-
                          ta.nce; W, the transaucer ratio in volts per ',Ve%vton; Cm, the mechanical compliance;
                          and M, the mass. in terms of: the dimensi@ns, L, W. T; specific crystal 2type,
                          PZT-SB, PZT-5ff.. etc. ,'-type of connection -,%,ithin the bimorph. series or parallel;
                          method of motiriting t@nd drive, e. g. cantilever mounting with driving force at the
                          free end.  With the above model. the internal stored electrical energy under short
                          circuit conditions is We c 1-2 CeV2  where V a NF with F  the  f.orce in 'L\le,.v-tons.
                                                     2
                          If an e.,rternal capacitance Cis connected and the crystal deformed by a force F.
                          e.\-ternal work will be done in charginr this capacitor. It can be shown that for
                          the greatest e.%-ternal work, the external capacitor must be equ2al in value to Ce in
                          which case   I We  joules are supplied. Since in actual use a bridge rectifier
                                       4
                          would be used which allows an equal quantity of elt.-ctrical work to be done as the
                          crystal relaxes,  1 We  is the theoretical maximum electrical eneray avaflable.
                                           2                                                 0        1
                          The moc%anical work done on the crystal in deforrration is appro-,imately - FDa
                                                                                                     2

                                                               -2i.
                                 where d. the deformation, is'CmF, thus Wm        1 CmF2.  The ratio
                                                                                  2
                                              We             2 2
                                                        Ce LX F        which for a PZT - 5B parallel bimo,-ph
           2                                Wm
                                                        2CmF
                                                      9  LW)        L
                                                2 x 10           3
                                                                    WTJ
                                 cantuever   is                     3         -which reduces to
                                               (2). (22. 8 x 16@   11
                                                                  WT  3
                                 .032 or 3. Zdlo.  Of great signlficarice is that all dimensions and the
                                 magnitude of force drop out! Also, a series-connected cantilever
                                 bi.-norph, and an end - suppoc-ted - center - driven  mounting  of  either
                                 se2ries or parallel connection can bp. sh-own to have the same efficieticy,
                                 and the PZT - SH material differs.,only slightly.  Thus. while eloo:fing
                                 diznensions, mounting, etc. wU'L certainly effect the quant,"ty of elect.@ital
                                 energy produced in a direct-coupled system, -this ent.,,gy can never be.
                2                 greater than 3. 2179-of the mechanical work supplied (as  defined  above).
                                 Itlustrations of the significance of these figures will be found in the
                                 discussion of previous experi;nental work.
                                       It was shown above that the maximum electrical energy which can
                                                                                 . 2  2
2                                 be produced  in one deformation cycle is 1 CeN F      .  The value  of  F,
                                                                            4
                                 of course, can not exceed the force necessary  to  fracture  the  crystal.
                                 For a cantilever beam of len,,qh L and thickness T, the strain is
                                                            S   -IT-  D4
                                                                 2 L2
                                 where D is tiie distance the free end is displaced.  NIaximum strain
                                 before fracture is an intrinsic material parameter and one value holds
                                 (approxi.mately) for any confi,-uration.  lvfr. Carnen Gerr.@-no oil Clevite

                                                                 jumjlil  -ilk
                                                               -22.
                                has recommended 5 x 15't (50'io of the fracturing strain)as the riax-
                                imurn  strain  to  apply  in  a  real  system.  We  can  assume  a  maximum
                                                              22  L2  5 x 164
                                deflection, then, of Dmax c     3T            for  a   cantilever   mounted
                                                                 f  F  ax  x  Dmax  (D  in  inches  implies
                                crystal  and  a  maximum  force  o  m      -Iff-
                                                                              m
                                Cm in in/Nt).  Electric2al output per deflection is, therefore, for a
                                PZT - 5B parallel bimorph cantaever:
                                                                                 2                )2
                                                      ,z X 169 L%V                   1 163     L2
                                       2'     2                            3
                                    eN Dmax-                   -LTL2-)        LW-T) (3
                                    4 Cm  2                                3     2
                                                                    -7     L
                                                               I x 10
                                                     (4)                 IVT3
                                                     420  LWT  micro'jou7,e.
                                       2                                    t
                                with L, W, T in inchis.  Since t"ne bimqrp@hs are only ava,,Iable in thick-
                                                                  3L
                                nesses close  to 2 0 m i.1, the maximum output per deflection is S. 4 micro-
                                joule per square inch of area.  Again,     it can be shown that this figure
     2                           is obtained for series as well as parallel connection, for center drive
                                as well as cantilever.
                                      The uni@ area output  per  deflection  can@be  increased  four  times
                                by allowing a "ileflec:'tion"to b@.e from - Dmax to + Dmax and back again,
                                thit is. by including a spring 2so that with  no  "external  force"  applied
                                the crystal is deflected in the ooposite  direction  from  that  which  the
                                exter-nal force produces.  This  variation  in  mounting  does  not  effect
                                efficiency since four times as much mechanicat work is required.
                                                                  -4
                                At the maximum stiain o2f 5 x 10  with a spring loaded crystal, the
                                absolute minimum surface area necessary to proiuce 200 uW is         6
                                square inches, where N is the number of deflections per secon(i, and.
                                according to our previous definition of 3. 217a efficiency, at least  .5250
                                uW mechanical  power  to  deform  the  crystal(s)  is  required.  In  order4
                                to extend the lifetime of the crystal by reducing fatigue it will probably prove

                                                            -2 3-
                               necessary to use smaue r deflections than we re assumed in the output
                               calculations above. The output varies as the square of the  strain
                               however, so that at a maxirnum strain of 25% of the fractv-ring point
                               24
                                  square i2nches of area are -required.
                                     If added mechanical complexity is introduced (e.g.  springs,
                               ratchets, escapements, etc.) all of the work during the active phase
                               (e. g. systole) can be retained in the crystal transducer pack@ige.
                               v@'hue extra mcving parts will cause losses themselves, sorn(- im-
                               pro2vement in efficiency'can be expected and the mechanisms can
                               allow other important fea4.ures to be incorporated, such as a improved.
                               Crystal mounting and drive with a fluid-free environment.  The diagram
                               below will illuttrat6 tYe type of system we had in mind.
                                                 Ratchet
                       2                             &                  it
                               A box of suitable material is fitted with a f7.exible metal "window" of
                               the corrugated.metal bellows type seen in wall  barometers,  which
                               allows both mechani@tal motion transmissionand the poss@@buity  of
                               rnatntaining a fluid barrier. The bellows' morvement winds a sp2ring through
                               a ratchet, which prevents aity loss of energy back through the bellows.
                               T@,e spring drives a wheel with fingers that deflect the end of a can-
                               til-2ver mounted crystal.  The alignment is such that when the crystal
                               is deformed a pres-L-lected distance, the fin-er slides off and the crystal
                               is set2 in oscillation at its natural frequency.  All of the work done in the
                               original deformation thus must be dissipated within the crystal, and
                               electrical energy is available during each cyc'.e of osciuati.on.  The
                               escapement prevents the next finger from engaging the crystal until
                                'ficient t-L-ne has passed for the oscillation to damp5 out.  SLnce several
                               su-

                                                            .24-
                                 fingee-pushes per second are possible, a relatively sy-nan area of
                                 crystal can be used. This arranifement also provides the desirable
                                 feature of allowing input energy to accumulate in the spring until
                                 sufficient force is developed to drive a f@nger over the 2crysl-al in
                                                                            If excess input energy
                                 the event that the. tnput falls below nor7inal.
                                 i,s available the crystal is driven more often, but. since its maximum
                                 deflection is always the same, it can not be broken.  E. V'an Haaften
                                 of Bulova Watch has designed 2a system similar in some respects to
                                 the above.  (18)
                                              b.        Permanent Magnet Generators
                                                        A transducer not generally considered in
                                 discussions of iinpianted power is the per-manent magnet ge@era*or.
                                 Because ot' the intrinsic weight@'of mignet 2and core materials, and be-
                                 cause the usual mechanical input is :,otational, this type of generator
                                 '@,ias little immediate appeal.  Eowev'er, if as has been suggested above.,
                                                 ,-ealing in a total enclosure and drive through spiring
                                 crystals require
                                 and gear mechanisw s f2or oitlmura re'sults then rotational input is not a
                                 relative disadvantaie. If an.implanted syst-dra must function for many
                                 years a p. rn. g!nerator shodld be satisl,'actory, while the fatigue lifetime
                                 of a crystal is not well understood. That weight is not an impossible
                                 obstacle is demonstrated by a generator 2manufactured by Rotating Com-
                                 ponents, Inc. and advertised in the 1966-67 Electrical Engineers
                                 Master catalog,  This unit is 1. 31" long by . 95" diameter, weighs 2. 5 oz
                                 and, we calculate, can produce 100 milliwatt at 60 revolutions per
                                 second.  A device especially dest@.med for 200 uW output and low rotation-
       2                          al speeds, therefore, should not be objectionably large, heavy or in-
                                 efficient.  We recommend that a p.m. generator not be dismissed until
                                 -further data on the practical tequirements and liniitations of crystals
                                 become available,  If the physiological and instrumentation problcms of

                                                            -25-
                                o'Dtaining mechanical work in the 10 milliwat-t range can be solved, a
                                p. m. generator may well be the better suited transducer.
                                           3.    Previous Work
                                D.-. John 'i. Kejr-edv
                                     Dr. John H. Kennedy and Carl C. Enger at the Cleveland
                                %Ietropolitan General Hospital have published several repo--ts of their
                                %v,ork .-.r"th a self-powered cardiac pacemaker.  6,7 he  evices
                                     r-ucted and implanted by this group corisist partially in a'piezo-
                                electric ceramic crystal mounted beneath a tlexible plastic co2ver.
                                The package containing the crystal-generatoeas well as the rectifier
                                a.nd pacemaker-electronics is sutured to the rib cage in a position
                                %vhe re the beating heart applies essilre- through the cover to the
                                crystal.  This lystem has, for s@ort periods, pro,@,ided effective
                                facing via stimulatin2g electrodes in'several experimental trials with
                                dogs.  Since our inte rest- is in the power generating aspects, we will
                                concentrate our attention on the crystal.
                                      In the mo@st re6ent pape (7) the crystax dimensions reported are
                                3. 75 x 1. 87 x .05 cm and dri%ie parameters are described as,      the
      2                          mechanical energy needed to operate  the  self-powered  pacemaker  is  200
                                newtons or 21. 4Cm. " Let us assume that %%hat was meant is a mech-
                                anical force of 2. 0 newton.  Usiner design equations supplied by Clevl:te.
                                                                 tD
                                the manufacturer of the ceramic crystals, it can 2be shu%v-n that for an
                                end supported, ceriter driven crystal of the quoted dimensions, the  force
                                necessary to produce a strain of 5 x 164 (the recommended maxixnuxn)
                                is 2. 3 Nt. According to our calculations a PZT-SB crystal of  the  quoted
                                dimensions deformed by a 2. 3 Nt force will produce no more than 9. 1
                                microjoule, and only 7 microjoule at 2. 0 Nt.  With a spring loaded crystal
                                (and 4. 0 Nt. 28 microjoule is possible. Kennedy mentions  the  figure  of

                                                                 -2 S-
                                  29 microjoule, but his reference is technically ambiguous.  In order
                                  to provide a low ripple electrical source, it appears a larger capacitor
                                  than the optimum for maximum efficiency.was used, however.  An
                                  output voltage of 1. 75 volts is 'mention2ed.  The maximum energy which
                                  can be supplied into a 1. 75 volt source by a PZT-5B crystal with the
                                  above dimensions and 2. 0 Nt driving force during a deformation -
                                  relaxation cycle depends on whe-ther a series or parallel type of crystal
                                  btmorph was used.  The  best  choice  is  parallel  which  can  provide  S.  4
   2                               n--Icrojoule.  With a heart rate of 120/min the maximum power that
                                  could be produced is therefore 11 uW.
                                        It is worth-noting that the mechanical power necessary to deform
                                  a directly   coupt.ed c@ystal that @r6vides'.1-1 uW of electrical power Ls
                                                          2         if !he transducer package ea
                                  at least 340 uW-.  Therefore,                                   n be designed
                                  to provide 201* efficiency rather than   3.2'lo, 68 uW could be obtained with
                                  no change in the mechani.cal power input.  Ar-d if the displacement is
                                  increased  from  .2mm  to  .6mrn,  enough  mechanical 2  power   is   available
                                  to produce 200 u W at 2017,o efficiency.  Even if only 1017* efficiency is
                                  attainable, a deflection of 1. 2z@nrn to increase'the power  -input  does  not
                                  appear unrea@onable.  Dr. Kennedy repor,.j that after a one year im-
                                  plantation no damage to the adjacent myocardium2 was found.  Electrical
                                  output apparently has not been maintained beyond a few days because
                                  of leakage of fluid into the package.  Improvements in the crystal mount-
                                  in.g and drive, in materials and packaging, and in surgical technique
                                  s'r.ould be undertaken.
                                  D@. Victor Parsonnet
                   0                     Dr. '%'-'.ctor Parscn.-ic@@, and his co-workers at the Nrewark. 1'%"ew
                                  Jersey Beth Tsrael liospital have published several papers describing
                                  their e)rpei-irr.4,.n,,s with ceramio- bi-norphs mounted on the aorti. (e.   18, 21)

                           AMh
                                                                .2 7-
                                  Their latest device contal-is two PZT-5 crystal siabs as the arms
                                  of a spring clothespin-like device which clamps onto the aorta.
                                  Each slab is I    by I 1 inches, an area which. according to our
                                       2                  2                   1
                                  previous calculations for unidirectional stress, can produce 31
                                  microjoule per  deflection.  This  group  has  chosen  a  maximum  stress
                                                                        2
                                  of 20'7o of the modulus of rupture or g of the stress necessary  to  pro-
                                  duce the 31 microjoule 2output (and a better choice from the fatigue
                                  lifetime viewpoint).  At this stress about 5 microjoule can be produced
                                  per deflection or about the same  output  as  Kennedy  has  acbieved.  As
                                  did Dr. Ker-iedy, Dr. Parsornet has ex-per,.eiced difficulty with  fluids
                                  leaking through his silicon rubber @2ncaps:ulation which has  limited  the
                                  electrical lifet"=e to a few hours.
                                        For an artery clamp of theclothespiii  ty-pe  the  mechanical  work
                                  done by each expansion of the artery is,roughly proportional to: systolic-
                                  diastolic pressure dlfferential, normal variation in arterw diameter in
                    2              each cycle, art@rial deameter,and length of artery  used.  For  the  fol-
                                  lowing set'of parameters, 20 mm I-1g, 2mm, lcm, 4cm,. we calculate an
                                  ene rgy yield of .500 rhicrojould pe r beat, which is I milliwa" at 22 0 beat3l
                                  minute.  Aortic e@xpansion does 'appear to be capable of producing the
        0                          necessary, quantity of mechanical work, but it remains for improved
                                  mechanical designs to meet the sealing, efficient drive, -and adaptatioa
                                  requirements which are demanded of a successful long term system.

                                                                  -28-
                                   -V.
                                         BI13LI00RAPHY
                                   1.    Becker, R. 0. , et. al., "The  dir-6ct:  current  control  system."
                                         N.Y. State J. Med.  vol. 63, pp. 1169 - 1176, 1962.
                                   2,    Belove,  L.,2  et.  al.,  The  Sealed  Nickel-Cadmium  Battery   Cell.
                                         BA112.  Sonotone Corporation
                                   3.    Be rkle y, C. . "Lon g-te rm e ffe cts, " A m. J. Med. Ele c. , vol. 3,
                                         pp. 7 - 8, No. 4.
                                   4..   Del Duca, M.G. , et. al.  ,  The  rrnodnarnies  and  Applications  of
2                                         Bioelectrochernical  Ene  ro--y  Conversion  Systems.   NASA   N65-
                                         352 42
                                   S.    Desin  and  AP2li6ation  of  Permaneht   Magnets.   Indiana   Steel
                                         Products Division Indiana General-Corp.
                                   6.    Enge r,    C.   and Kennedy@.- J. H.. "An   improved    bioelectric
                                                                      0
                                         generator,"  Trans.  Amer.  Soc.  Artif.  Int.  Organs   vol.   10,
                                         pp. 373 - 377, 1964
                                   7.    Enger, C@. C., Kennedy, J. H.,    Michel.   A.G.,   "A   subminiature
                                         implantable  sel2f-powered   cardiad   pacemarer:   circuit   design."
                                         Trans. Amer.'Soc. Artif. Tnt. Oraa         vol. 11, pp. 148       151
                                         1965
                                   a.    Evans, W.G.,    "Characteristics   of   thermoelectric    materials,"
                                         Semiconductor Products, pp. 34 - 39, April 1963.
        2                           9.    Germano,  C.  P.,  Useful  Relationships   for   Circul@r   Ceramic
                                         Bender Bimorphs, TP - 230, Clevite Corporation, 1965
                                   10.   Cermano,.  C.  P.,  Useful  Relationships  for   Retancular   Ceramic
                                         Bender Bimorphs. T? - 22 3.  Clevite Corporation, 1961
                                   11.   124andbook  of  Chemistry  and  Physics,  44th   Edition.   Chemical
                                         Rubber PublishLng Co., 1961.
                                   12.   Yonikoff, J. J. , Research Study of the  Utilization  of  Bioelectric
                                         Potentials.  NASA N65 - 17947.

                                                           -29
                                 13.   Lewis, K.  "Sy-rnposiu 'on Bioelectro-chemistry, of Mici@0-
                                                            M
                                       organisms, rV.  Biochemical Fuel Calls," Bacteriological
                                       Reviews, vol. 30. pp. 101 - 113, Mar. 19626.
                                 14.   Long, F. M., "Biological energy as'a power source for a
                                       physiological talemeluering systein, " IRE Intl' Convention Rec.
                                       ptg, 196
                                 15.   Massie, H. , et. al. . "Cardiac pacemaker without batteries,
                                       ProceedinEr of the 18th Annual Confer2ence on Engleeering-in
                                 16.   Medical Physioloe
                                                        _y and Biophysics, T. C. Ruch and J. P. Fulton,
                                       Ed. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1960
                                 17.   Mowbray, A. Q., "Standard rnate@rials for surgical implants,"
                                       Am. J. iaed. Elec., vol. 4, pp.'.19 - 21, no. 3.
                                 18.   Mye rs,   H. ' et-. al. . "Etolog[caUy ene rgized cardia c pacemake rs,
                                       A m. J. @,led. Blec.  vol. 3@. pp. 233 - 236, No. 4.
                                                          J
                                 19.   DTims, L. F., Calvant, Volta aiid BicEli2EIEISI!Z. NASA N 66 -1717S
                                 20.   One Hundred MUlion Heartbeats.  Mallory Battery Company
                                 21.   Parsonnet, V.   et. al. "The potential@ty of the use of biolo  c
                                       ene rgy as a po@we r sourde for implartable pace make rs, " Ann.
                                       N.Y. Acad. Sci. , vol. Ill, art. 3, pp. 9215, June 1964.
                                 22.   Piezoelectric TechnoloV Data for D-esigners.  Clevite Corporation.
                                       1965.
                                 23.   Potter, M. C. , "Electrical ef'A'ects azcompanying the decomposition
                                       of organic compounds, " Proc, Royal Soc. London, vol. 84 (B)
                                       pp. 960, 1912.
               2                  24.   Rehm. VV. . "Stomach production of electrical energy," Am. J.
                                                 vol. 154, pp. 148 - 154, 1948
                                 25.   Reynolds, L. W. , "Utilization of Bicelectricity as power supply for
                                       iinplanted electronic devices," Aerosoace Medicine. vol. 35, pp.
                                       115 - 117, 19645.

