                                              THIS DOCUMENT CONTAINS
                                                     PAGES, COPY NO./
                                               OF     COPIES.
                          NON-PENETRATING IMPACT
                                    AS AN
                    AGENT FOR PERSONNEL INCAPACITATION
                                 Prepared by:
                                 31 January 1972

                      This report has been prepared by the
                                                                       a s
                      a part of a Government contract.   The views expres-.
                      sed are those of -------- - lpersonnel and not neces-
                      sarily those of the United States Government.

                                      TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                               Page
           Protocol Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .  .
           List of Figures and Tables   . . . . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .
           Problem  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
           Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .      I
           Discussion  . . . . . . . . . . 2. . . . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .      2
                 J. Potential Applications for Incapacitation  . . . .  .  .      2
                 II. Physical Variables of Impact  . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .      4
                III. Physiological Considerations . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .      7
                    A.  Impact as a Reaction  . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .      7
                    B.  Physical Basis for Biologic Effects                       8
                    C.  Biologic Effects  2. . . . . .  . . .                      9
                    D.  Thresholds   . . . . . . . . . . . .  ..  .  .  .  .     11
                    E.  Physiological Conclusions    . . . . . .  .  .  .  .     21
                IV. Other System Factors    . . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .     23
                    A.  Range   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .     23
                    B.  Covertness    . . . . .  . . . . . . . .                 23
                    C.  Duration of Incapaci2tation  . . . . . . . .  .  .  .     Z3
                    D. Countermeasures       . . . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .     24
                 V. Equipment State of the Art    . . . . . . . . .  .  .  .     25
                VI. Recommendations    . . . . . . . . .  .  ...  .  .  .  .     28
           References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     30

                                           LIST OF FIGURES
                                                                                 Pa@,,e
           Figure   1.    Factors of the Reaction Between an
                               Impacting Object  and  the  Human  Body  .  .  .      7
           Figure   2.    Approximate Acceleration -- Injury Correla-
                               tion of the Study by Higgins, et al  .  .    . .    13
  2         Figure   3.    Suggested Approximate Thresholds for Impact
                               Effects on the Head Under Laboratory
                               Conditions  . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    14
                                            LIST OF TABLES
           Table I        Metric Units of the Fundamental Dynamic
                               Factors of Impact    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 6
           Table II       Hypothetical Results of a Well-Develop2ed
                               Concussion System Under Field Conditions            16
           Table   III    Effects of Non-Penetra-tinc, Impacts on the
                                                      In
                               Trunk  . . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    la
           Table    IV    Estimated Durations of Incapacitation for
                               Non-Repetitive Impacts     . . . . .  .  .  .  .    24
           Table V        Effects of Soft Plast6ic Projectiles Designed
                               to Cause Concussion     . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .    Z6

                      NON-PENETRATING IMPACT AS AN- AGENT FOR
                               PERSONNEL INCAPACITATION
                                         PROBLEM
         To evaluate, especially from the physiologic point of view, non-penetrating
         impact as an agent for personnel incapacitation.
                                       INTRODUCTION
         For the purposes of this report, a non-penetrating impact is considered to be
         a relatively high-6velocity collision between a.blunt object and the human body,
         excluding those collisions that break the skin.  The results of non-penetrating
         impact are usually classed as blunt trauma in the medical literature.
         Healthy adult humans in the 45 to 90 kilogram weight range are assumed to
         be the subjects for incapacitation throughout this report.

                                          DISCUSSION
                          I.  Potential AT)T)Iications for Incapacitation
         Controlled impact can offer a number of  advantages  when  compared  to  other
         proposed techniques for personnel incapacitation.  Among the possible advan-
          tages are:
                Spectrum of incapacitation: pain,  muscle  spasm,  breathlessness,  un-
                consciousness, severe injury.
                Rapidity of incat)acitation: onset of action within a second.
                DirS!@@ with respect to person to be incapacitated.
                Controllabili@y: of time of onset and type of incapacitation.
                Safety- for the operator.
                SimglLcity: of techniquesatid equipment.
                Covertness:  can be extremely quiet and unobtrusive.
           Most of the incapacitating biologic effects of impact are critically dependent
         2  upon anatomic location, implying that an impact system would have to be
           aimed at a selected point on the subject's body by some means.  Under field
           conditions, impact systems will probably not prove feasible for incapacitafing
           a group of subjects at one time although a system might be capable of incapa-
           citating a number of individuals in rapid succession.  The aiming requirement
           also indicates that most systems would have to be controlled directly2 by  an
           operator; any pre-set trap system would have to: (1) ensure that the subject
           will move precisely into a pre-determined position; or (2) be equipped  with
           an elaborate automatic aiming subsystem.
           Incapacitation by impact alone will usually be brief unless the operator is
           willing to risk severe injury or death of the subject.. The rapid on--etof
           incapacitation by impact makes it a natural choice for the initial "9knockdown"'
           technique, to be followed immediately by application of a different method of
           maintaining control of the subject if prolonged incapacitation is desired.  In
           the 'rolonged incapacitation case, the requirement for prompt application of
                p
                                                  Z-

      a second technique may prove to be a limiting factor in the range of pro-
      jecta@le impact systems in that the operator(s) would have just afew
      seconds to approach the downed subject and apply the second technique.
      Within these limitations, a variety of impact systems could be developed
      for general or specific application.  Exanples would be a hand-held "calibra-
      ted blackjack, " a relatively long-range projectile "stun gun" or a hijacker
      tr5ap installed on aircraft.  The impact delivery system would be mechani-
      cally simple and reliable, using power from human muscle, springs,
      compressed gas, pyrotechnics, or other sources.  Repeat action could be
      developed for use against multiple subjects.
                                                  3-

                                  II.  Physical Variables of Impact
             Impact is collision, the forceful contact of two objects that have moved to-
             gether. In an elemel-itary sense, the basic factors of impact are  simple:
             the mass and structural characteristics of each object and their  relative
             velocity just before impact. In most practical situations, a detailed  en-
             gineering analysis of an impact situation would require tha2t  a  large  number
             of variables be considered and a complete description of the  event  would  be
             extremely complex. A major  complication  in  most  impact  analyses  is  that
             a number of important variables change  rapidly  and  interdependently  during
             a short time period.
             In a simple impact case, two objects approach' each other at a known velocity
             and in a known geometric relationship. Both objects  start  to  be  deformed
2             at the first moment of contact, and pressure and shear waves start to travel
             through both objects.  The area of contact between the objects becomes
             larger as a result of deformation to "fit, " although pressure usually remains
             highest at the centerpoint of the contact  area.  Momentum  is  conserved  and
             transferred between the objects. Kinetic  energy  is  conserved,  trar@sferred
             between objects, stored as potential ene2rgy, or dissipated as sound, frictional
             heat or disruption of one or both objects. Both  objects  accelerate;  usually
             both ob ects are subject to combined linear  and  angular  accelerations.  If
             a sufficiently strong elastic component is present in the interaction, the
             objects will be forced apart and the area of contact will  become  smaller  as
             one or both objects release potential elastic energy and start to restore their
             ori3ginal shape. -Impact is complete as soon as kinetic  energy  transfer  is
             complete and the two objects are moving together as a unit (like aball of
             putty thrown so as to stick on a wall) or have broken contact to move
             independently again.
             Detailed analysis of the reaction described above would not  be  a  simple
                                                   -4-

            matter even with the simplest sort of homogeneous masses moving as
            "isolated systems" in the ideal physical sense, or with perfect billiard
            balls moving on a perfect billiard table.  When one of the objects is as
            inhornogeneous, complex and irregular as the human body, the problem of
            impact defies detailed analysis except for minor extrapolations of empiri-
            cal data.  Any systematic treatment of the human body i2n impact must
            consider the body as a number of masses connected in a variable geometry
            by supporting structures with rapidly varying mechanical characteristics.
            A blow to the head of a man reading a book is likely to have an effect
            quite different from the same blow delivered to the same man by an
            opponent in the boxing ring.
            Table I briefly defines fundamental dynamic units of impact factors, in the
            metric system.  Non-metr2ic units commonly found in the impact literature
            are: 'latmospherel' of pressure equal to about 1. 01 - lOrdynes/crxi@ ; iic;ii
            of acceleration equal to about 980 cm/sec2; the English unit "pound" has been
            confusing because it may be used as a unit of mass or a unit of force.  All
            of the factors noted in Table I are vector quantities except for mass and
            kinetic energy.
            4This report will not deal specifically with the factors that determine the
            structural characteristics of colliding objects.  The various moduli,
            strengths, viscosities and impedances that quantitatively define the compres-
            sibility, plasticity and elasticity of-structures in the human impact context
            have been reviewed by von Gierke.
                                                  5-

                                                 TABLEI
                                          METRIC UNITS OF THE
                            FUNDAMENTAL DYNAMIC FACTORS OF IMPACT
               Factor              Definition                   Unit            Eq'uivalent
             Mass           Inertial characteristic of         gram
                            matter; proportional to
                            "weight" in gravity field
             Velocity       2Rate of change of position         cm/ sec
             Accelera-      Rate of change of velocity         cm/ sec 2
               tion
             jolt 3         Rate of change of acceleration     cm/ sec@
             Momentum       Product of mass and velocity;      gm-cm/sec
                            also, product of force and
                            time
             Force          Product of mass and accelera-      dyne                gm-cm/se   62
                   2         tion
                    3                                                                          3
             Onset          Rate of change of force; also,     dyne/sec            gm-cm/se   C
                            product of mass and jolt
             Pressure       Force per unit area                barye               dyne/cm2
             Kinetic        Work capability due to motion;     erg                 gm-cma/sec  2
               energy   7    product of force and  distance
                     One Newton is 10   a dynes
                      One joule is IC7 ergs.

                                              III.  Physiological Considerations
                A. Impact as a  Reaction
                The physical and biological consequences of impact are determined by the
                reaction between the impacting object and the human body.  Figure 1 indi-
                cates a number of the factors and subfactors that enter into and modify the
                reaction.  Primary impact factors are those related to the initial contact
          2                                                  The Reaction
                                                   Anatomic location of primary
                                                   impact;
                                                   Relative velocity;
                                                   Size of contact area;
                                                   Direction of momentum vector
                                                     relative to body axes
           2       ImT)actiniz Objec                                                             I-iuman Body
              Mass;                                                                      Mechanical characteristics of
              Size;                                                                         the part struck;
              Shape;                                                                     Size;
              Compressibility;                       Modifiers o2f the Reaction.          Health;
              Plasticity;                          Interposed rigid shielding;           Posture
              Elasticity;                          Interposed padding;                      of the part struck,
              Attachments to other struc-          Support for body or parts                of other parts
                 tures;                                                                  Muscle tone
              Orientation at moment of'impac            2                                    at moment of impact
              Surface characteristics
                                                   Details of Body Acce eration
                                                   Peak differential acceleration;
                                                   Duration of acceleration;
                                                   Shape of acceleration curve;
                                                   Others
                                   2                   Primary Biologic Effects
                      . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . .  . .  . .  . . .  . .  . . . . . . . .  .  .  . . . .
                                                    Factors of Secondary Impact
                                                     Secondary Biologic Effects
                                 Figure 1.  Factors of the Reaction Between a* Impacting Object
                                                         and the Human Body.
            7       Including both linear md angular accelerations.
                                                                       7-

           between an impacting object and the body.  Secondary  impact  would  be  any
           subsequent impact events which might occur as a consequence  of  the  first.
           Examples of secondary impact would be collisions between: (1) the same
           impacting mass anci a seconcl body part; (2) two bocly parts; or (3) some body
           part and a second object, such as a floor or wall.
           consideration of Figure 1 leads to the conclusion2 that many of the variables
           important to an impact problem a-:-e interrelated in a complex manner, and
           suggests that many factors carl be critical with regard to the biologic outcome
           of any given impact situation.
           B.  Physical Basis for Biologic Effects.
           Most of the biologic effects of impact are due to mechanical deformations of
           body tissues.  These deformations are the result of forces arising from
           differential ac2celeration of body parts. The forces may  tend  to  compress,
           expand, bend, shear or twist the tissues.  The force pattern is usually com'-
           plex and changes rapidly with time.  Oscillations may travel to body areas.
           away from the site of impact in the form of compressional or shear waves,
           and oscillatory action could persist for a short time.
           Pre-impact momentum is conserved when the post-impact vector velocities
           of both the impact2ing object and the body are considered.  These velocities
           also constitute part of the energy that is conserved through the impact event.
           Part of the kinetic energy of impact is converted to frictional heat from:
           (1) deformations of the impacting object and the body; and (2) contact  with
           the air.and other surrounding materials.  More of the kinetic energy may be
           absorbed in structural disruption or converted to potential energy or soun4d.
           The physic:tl effects of impact on living systems may be summarized as:
           (1) short term deformations; (2) longer term  deformation  including  struc-
           tural disruptions; and (3) heating, usual minor.  Redistribution of body fluids
                                                  8-

           and othcr effects only become significant when unidirectional accelerative
           forces persist longer than a second; these effects are beyond the scope
           of this report.
           C.  BioloL7ic Effects.
           Most of the biologic effects that might be desired for temporary incapacita-
           tion of personnel are caused by the short-term deformations of tissue,
           especially those with rapid onset.  A forceful push will not be a2s effective
           as a sharp blow for incapacitation purposes.
           The most dramatic transient effects of impact are those on nervous and mus-
           cular tissues.  Appropriate rapid deformation of these "irritable" tissues
           can cause depolarization ("firing" of nerve cells, contraction of muscle
           fibers) and an alteration of the functional status of the tissues for some time
           after the blow.  This is the mechanism of all the commonly experienced e2ffects
           that start with great rapidity following impact.  Firing of nerve fibers in the
           skin and deeper. structures causes the immediate pain at the site of impact,
           as well as effects like the tingling pain that shoots down the forearm from a'
           blow on the "funny bone, " (the ulnar nerve at the elbow).  Rapid compression
           of muscle tissue is presumed to be the cause of the fcharley horse, " a
           painfully persistent mass of spastic m2uscle resulting from a blow.  The dis-
           play of lights "seen" by a person receiving a sub-concussive blow on the head is
           apparently caused by direct mechanical stimulation of the visual cortex of
           the brain; a similar display can be induced by experimental electrical stimu-
           lation of the visual cortex.  Concussion, the sudden loss of consciousness
           immediately following a blow to the head, is presumed to be caused by short-
           term mechanical defor7mation.of the central nervous system.  Electroenceph-
           alographic and animal studies indicate that concussion is due to functional
           changes in vital hindbrain centers.  These same studies also indicate that
           certain'phases of the concussion-recovery sequence include suppression of
           basic reflex activitie.s, and other phases resemble natural deep sleep and.
           awakening.  4,5

             Longer term effects of impact may include: (1) alteration in  the  per-
             eability of vasc,-ilar systems near the impact site; (Z) disruptions of
             m
             blood vessels; (3) dislocation and/or breakage of structures other than
             blood vessels. The permeability changes  account  for  swelling,  aside
                              tic muscle, without discoloration.  Breaks in blooci
             from lumps of2 spas
             vessels cause the subcutaneous hemorrhage  of  a  simple  contusion  or
             bruise, as well as more serious losses of blood from the vascular sys-
             tem.  Bones, cartilages and teeth are subject to dislocation by impact.
             Organs seriously injured by blunt trauma are usually classified as:
             skin and subcutaneous tissue; skeletal muscle;  the  complete  skeleton
             including cartilage and teeth; heart and great vessels; the "hollow2 viscerati
             including the gastro-intestinal, biliary and lower urinary systems; the
             solid organs" including brain, liver, spleen and kidneys; and special
             organs such as lungs, eyes, genitalia and larynx.  Impact   can cause chain
             reactions of injuries such as a blow to the chest which fractures ribs in
             such a way that the rib fragments cut blood vessels and membranes covering
             the lungs.  The latter injuries can lead to 2serious internal hemorrhage
             and potentially fatal lung collapse. Laceration of the liver or  other  solid
             organs can cause massive internal hemorrhage and perforation of any
             hollow viscus leads to a lif e- threatening peritonitis.  Either of these latter
             injuries, along with bleeding inside the skull and any injury  that  prevents
             adequate respiration, will usually be fatal unless medical care, including
             major surgery, is av2ailable promptly.
             Frictional heat of impact may play a part in the biologic effects of high
             velocity  low momentum impacts, such as a painful switch on the skin with
             a lightweight whip.  Although the possible abrasive component of such a
             blow is difficult to evaluate, enough heat energy  from  the  impact  may  be
             dissipated in the skin to cause some of the observed local effects.  A whip
             mark can resemble a thermal burn in many w5ays, with painful red swelling
             and tendency to blister and peel.  It is interesting to speculate that any
             rapid change in skin energy level tends to evoke a similar type of response,
             regardless of whether change is due to  heat,  cold,  friction,  electricity,
             ionizing radiation or high velocity impact.
                                                      10-

          D.  Thresholds.
          For the purposes of the personnel incapacitation problem, the desired
          effects of impact would seem to be limited to: (1) concussion or other
          sudden decrement in level of consciousness; (Z) transient paralysis in-
          cluding apnea; and (3) pain or the threat of pain. The other effects noted
          in the previous section of this report either would @ot contribute to prompt
          incapacitation 2of the subject or would constitute a potentially serious in-
          jury to the subject. Some results of impact could be both ineffective and
          dangerous; a crippling or life-threatening wound might not necessarily
          be rapidly incapacitating unless it also had sufficient effect in at least
          one of the three categories noted above. The remainder of this report
          will assume that impact is to be arranged so as to maximize the three
          potentially incapacitating effe2cts and to minimize all of the other effects.
          Concussion without other damage could be a rapid and thorough type of
          incapacitation. Scientific attempts at evaluation of the factors and thres-
          holds of concussion started well back in the last century and continue to
          present. Evaluation techniques have ranged from analyses of accidents
          and sporting events to postmortem studies and carefully controlled impacts
          deliberately delivered to the heads o2f experimental animals. The results
          of all these investigations may be summarized as follows:
                1. The detailed mechanism ar mechanisms leading to concussion
          remain a matter of debate. Some hypothetical mechanisms which have been
          advanced are as follows:
                    (a) Local skull deformation with local pressure
                 effects;
                    (b) Increased overall intracranial pressure;
                    (c) Differenti3al intracranial pressure;
                    (d) Differential pressure across the foramen magnum;
                    (e) Shear forces across the brain stem;
                    (f) Linear acceleration of the whole head;

                                                            differential motion
                     (g) Angular head acceleration causing
                between brain and skull;
                     (h) Cavitation;
                     (i) Flexion-compression phenomena at the craniospinal junc-
                 tion and,
                     (j) Overstimulation of neck propriocept6rs.
             Several of these hypotheses have been more or less disproved, at least
     2        in certain experimental circumstances, by later investigations.  There
             is no generally accepted mecha nism or group of mechanisms for concussion.
                 2. There is general agreement: that alteration of function  of  struc-
             tures in the hind brain and brain stem is a            of concussion; that
             a head free to move relative to the neck and shoulders is more subject to
             concussion than a firmly supported head; and that repeate2d concussive
             blows greatly increase the likelihood of serious injury or death.
                  3.  Even with meticulous laboratory attempts to control all of the
             variables indicated in Figure 1, no investigator has been able to establish
             precise thresholds between non-concussion and concussion, or between
             concussion and more serious injuries.  This failure is linked directly to
             the lack of understanding noted in paragraph 1 ab2ove.
             The careful work of Higgins, et al ;illustrates the difficulties involved in
                                                                                      . .
             attempts to define a predictable relationship between impact and concussion.
             These investigators delivered calibrated, aimed impacts to  the  precisely
             oriented heads of twenty-five monkeys that had shaved scalps  "potted"  in
             plaster inside metal helmets.  This ela0borate preparation brought under
             control many of the variables noted in Figure 1.  Even under these special
             conditions, with skull deformation a virtual impossibility, the authors were
             unable to calculate impact characteristics that would reliably cause  con-
             cussion without other serious injury.  The concussive results were reported
                                                    12-

                      not in terms of standardized impact "doses" but in terms of measured
                      angular acceleration imparted to the head.   The reported results of the
                      study are approximately summarized in Ficure 2.
                                      A                B
                                                                                                                                              
99,79
                      2                                                                        ?      RAPIDLY FATAL
                                                                                                         (Percentage)                          
1070
                                                                                   INTRACRANIAL HEMORRHAGE                                    
99%
                                                                                                 (Percenta2ge)                                 
1010
                                                                                                                                              
9  9010
                                                                                     CONCUSSION
                                                                                     (Percentage)                                              
laic
                    1. 0            1. 5             2. 0             2.5              3. 0             3.5              4. 0             4.  
5
                                                       Angular Head Acceleration   (106 radian.9 per seC2)
                                   Figure 2.   Approximate Acceleration -- Injury Correlation
                                                            of the Study by Higgins,  et al.
                     Figure     2      2indicates      that      under      the      extremely      rigid      artificial      test     
conditions
                     an     acceleration     level     ".A"      could      have      been      preselected      to      yield      rates     
smaller
                     than     1%     for     serious     injury     or      death      in      conjunction      with      "successful"     
con-
                     cussion rates on the order of 25%.   Acceleration level "Bl' co2uld have been
                     expected     to     yield     a     concussion     rate     of     99%     with      a      serious      hemorrhage     
rate
                     of     about     50%     and     a     rapid     death     rate     still     below     1%.     The     thresholds     
indicated
                     by Figure 2 would have been even broader and more overlapping if the
                                                                                     163-

            investigators had been forced to relate the effects directly to some
            measurement of the delivered impact, rather than to the resultant
            head acceleration.
            A8mitting that their results give only the roughest approximations of
            thresholds, most other investigators have found that velocity of  impact
            is as useful as any other single index in predicting effects on experi-
            mental animals when the2 mass of the  impacting  object,  anatomic  loca-
            tion and other factors are kept as constant as possible.  The  impacting
            object is commonly assumed to have a mass about equal to the weight
            of the head and neck of the experimental animal, or  about  5  kilograms
            in the case of adult humans, and may be assumed to have the structural
            characteristics of a compact block of wood without  sharp  edges.  Using
            these and other criteria, sug2gested approximate  thresholds  for  impact
            effects on the head are shown in Figur.e 3.
                                                                                   99%
                                                       ?        RAPIDLY FATAL
                                                                                   I,%  .
                                         ?                                         9,9%
                                          2          GROSS INTRACRANIAL HEMORRHAGE
                                                                                   99610
                                                             SKULL FRACTURE
                                                                                   1%
                                                                                   99%
                                                               CONCUSSION
                                  7                                                 I%
               z      3       4       5       6       7       a      9       10
                                       Impact Velocity    (meters per secon@)
                Figure 3.  Suggested Approximate Thresholds for Impact Effects on
                            the Head Under Laboratory Conditions. 6, 7
                                                  14-

                The thresholds indicated by Figure 3 are approximately the same as
                those suggested for situations in which the head is rapidly decelerated
                by striking large objects such as the ground or structure of buildings
                or vehicles.7
                Velocity of impact is the independent variable shown for Figure 3, al-
                though the stipulation that the impacting object has a mass on the order
                of 5 kilograms de2fines the abscissa in terms of momentum also.  Ex-
                perienced investigators of the biologic effects of impact tend to agree
                that: (1) there is no single mechanical unit that provides an optimum
                measurement of the biologic "dose" of impact; and (2) velocity and/or
                momentum come closer than any other units to providing satisfactory
                correlations over a wide range of conditions.  Kinetic energy correlations
           2     break down at the low-mass end of the scale where high velocity objects
                penetrate the skull without causing concussion, and at high-mass end of
                the scale where biologic effects seem to be more in proportion to velocity
                than to energy.  Acceleration or force values correlate to biologic effects
                only when the duration of action is taken into consideration.  As indicated
                by Table I (page 6), integration of accel2eration or force with respect to
                time yields units similar to velocity or momentum.  Detailed evaluation
                of mechanical impact events can be derived only from high-speed recording
                of some factor(s) in the displacement-velocity-acceleration spectrum from
                multiple sites around the head.  Of the many possible single mechanical values,
                velocity seems to retain fairly uniform biologic significance over a wide
                2range of conditions.  Even momentum has a limited range: the impact effects
                of a slowly rolling automobile are quite different from the impact effects
                of a small lead pellet with momentum equal to that of the automobile.
                Figure 3, as imprecise as it is, must be considered as only the roughest
                guide to impact thresholds, and only under laboratory conditions.  The
                experimental conditions under which these thresholds weremeasu0red usually
                included absolute control over the posture and orientation of the subject
                with respect to the impact.  Such control implies previous incapacitation
                                                      15-

                                                                     physical res-
            of the subiect by some means, usually anesthesia and/or
            traints.  Control of subject posturer orientation and other factors shown
            in Figure 1 (page 7) would be even more difficult under field conditions ..
            than it is in the laboratory.  The net effect of such variability could only
            be to widen and increase the overlapping of the already broad t2hresholds
            shown in Figures 2 and 3.  No numerical data from impact studies under
            actual or simulated field conditions are available. An impact incapacita-
            tion system might be developed that could yield results similar to those
            shown in Table II under selected field conditions.
                                             TABLE II
                      HYPOTHETICAL RESULTS OF A WELL-DEVELOPED
                        CONCUSSION SYSTEM-UNDER FIELD CONDITION2S
             Effects                                  Impact Levels
                                            A                B
            Concussion                                      5 0 alo:k         9 5 a/O:i:
            Non-Concussion                9 5 0,10:k        5 0 Olo:: F.       50/0+-
            Skull Fracture             <   5 50            10 - 400/o       > 5 07o
            Serious Hemorrhage          <  5 olo           10 - 40(7o       > 5 0 olo
            Rapid Death                 <   10/0            1 - 100/o       >  1 0010
            On the basis of presently available information, the hypothetical rates shown
            in Table II may even be overly optii-nistic with regard to the safety of blows
            to the head at concussive levels.  It 3should be noted that Table II is concer-
            ned with-intracranial effects only; injuries to eyes and other facial struc-
            tures   would be a separate consideration in anterior blows to the head.
            Non-penetrating impacts to the trunk offer no special advantages for
              The relative tolerance of human facial structures to impact has been repor-
              ted by Swearingen. 8

            personnel incapacitation with the possible exception of the "solar plexus
            punch" to the epigastrium.  This blow, familiar to participants in contact
            sports, causes the "breath to be knocked out" of the subject for periods
            ranging from a few seconds to as long as a minute.  Characteristically,
            the subject remains relatively motionless in a doubled up position and is
            unable to breathe or speak until he recovers.  The @xact mecha2nism by
            which both diaphragmatic and intercostal breathing is inhibited remains
            unknown; the "solar" or celiac plexus of nerves to the intestines may or
            may not be involved.  The blow usually has much of the mass of a player
            behind it and is most effective when the subject is not tensed to receive the
            impact. A typical solar plexus blow might be  characterized  as  landing  be-
            tween the umbilicus and the xiphoid process,  directed  str2aight  posteriorly
            or slightly headward, with an effective mass greater than ten kilograms
            and a velocity of several meters per second.  Available reports mention
            no experimental work that would help to explain or quantitate the  effective-
            ness of impacts delivered to the epigastrium.
            The equivalent of a solar plexus punch would probably be difficult to develop
            into a safe and effective technique for personnel incapacitation.  A 2perfectly
            delivered impact that had been calculated to incapacitate a man tensed to
            receive the blow could prove fatal if the subject does not'tense in time.
            Errors in anatomic location and direction of impact would lead to decreasing
            effectiveness and increasing rates 6f serious injury and fatality.  Properly
            directed but excessively powerful blows could kill by rupturing the aorta,
            diaphragm, stomach or other viscera.  Blows 2slightly high could contuse the
            heart or cause lung collapse -from rib cartilage fragments.  Lateral aiming
            errors could cause rupture of liver, spleen or kidney.  A low blow could
            rupture a full bladder or other lower abdominal structure.
            Clemedson, et al have reviewed the relative tolerance of various body parts
            to blunt trauma, and come to the conclusion that  liver,  spleen  and  kidney
            are the organs most susceptible t5o severe injuries from flying missiles.    7
                                                    17-

            Table III sumn-iarizes the scanty information available on injury thres-
            holds for non-penetrating impacts on the trunk.
            It should be noted that the effects shown in Table III provide no guide to the
            effectiveness of a blow in causing rapid incapacitation.  Even the lethal
            impacts shown in the table might cause no significant incapacitation for several
            minutes.  The only rapidly incapacitating effects th at could be expe2cted from
            a non-fatal blow to the trunk would be pain and the solar plexus effects dis-
            cussed previously.
            Impacts on extremities are unlikely to cause'transient incapacitating effects
            other than pain.  A blow that would pinch a peripheral nerve hard enough to
            cause a paralysis of the muscles served by that nerve is quite likely to
            destroy a section of the nerve.  Long bones of the extremities can be broken
            by energ2etic direct-blows.  These so called "billy club" fractures are more
            common in the shin and forearm where  the  bones  are  not  heavily  padded
            with soft tissue.  Wartime British investigators conducted tests with
            experimental animals and e,;timated that direct blows by a metal rod with
            kinetic energies in the 1Z to 60 joule range should suffice to fracture the
                                                                9
            human hume2rus, with a mean energy of Z7 joules.        The same group estimated
            that three times as much energy would be required to break the stronger and
            better padded human femur. If  these  estimates  are  correct,  blows  with
            masses less than a kilogram and with fairly low energies (on the order of
            5 joules) could probably break the human fibula, radius or ulna under some
            circumstances.     Even so, certain fractures of the fibula and ot2her
            smaller bones may not be extremely painful, or otherwise incapacitating
            to the subject.  "Safe" blows, therefore, could not be expected to cause much
            in the way of incapacitation.
            Transiently incapacitating pain can be generated by appropriate impact any-
            where on the body surface.  Skin pain is caused by low mass, high velocity
            blows sach as those delivered by  a  willow  switch.  Blows  from  slightly
            heavier objec0ts can cause deeper pain if delivered to body areas where bones
                                                    18-

                                                      TABLE      III
                    EFFECTS OF NON-PENETRATING IMPACTS ON THE TRUNK
                                            (After Clemedson, et al)        7
                   Impac t                  Moving             Velocity
                  Location            Mass (kg)             (.meter/sec.                   Effect
             Lateral chest                 0.  18t                 Z4 2          local lung hemorrhage
                                           0.  18t                 36           lacerations from rib
                                                                                   fragments
                                           0.  18t                 52           rapidly    lethal
                                           0.  36t                 13           local lung hemorrhage
                                         2  0.  36t                 Z7           lacerations from rib
                                                                                   fragments
                                           0.  36t                 47           rapidly    lethal
             Over   liver                 15. 5@                      2         minor liver damage
                 11    ti                 15. 5*                      4         t2hreshold of severe
                                                                                    damage
                                          15. 5*                 6    10        rapidly    lethal
              Whole body                  70*                         3         usually survive
                 if     it                70*                         6         threshold of lethality
                 it     11                70*                        2 8         50% lethal
                                          70*                         9         near 100,7o lethal
                      Clemedson implies that the data is applicable to the human trunk,
                      although  most   of   the   experimental   work   was   with   animals.   7
                   t  Missile   comparable   to   a    croquet    ball.
                      Pendulum weight of unspecified "solid" material.
                      Whole bodies 6thrown, presumably laterally, against an unspecified
                      large solid surface.
                                                              19-

            or cartilages have only a shallow covering of soft tissues.  This pain
            arises from  the  sensitive  periosteal,  or  perichondreal,  membranes  cover-
            ing bones and cartilages.  The  relatively  hard  material  underlying  perios-
            teum makes the membrane susceptible to a pinching action from brisk
            impact with a hard object. Periosteum  is  usually  shallow  in  the  following
            body areas: skull, clavicles, extremity joi2nts, shins, backs of hands and
            tops of feet.
            Certain body areas  deserve  special  comment  with  regard  to  impact  sensi-
            tivity.  The eyes and the laryngeal area are extremely sensitive to pain
            and impact, but blows that would  be  inconsequential  elsewhere  on  the  body
            could cause severe injuries in these two areas.  The testicles are also
            extraordinarily sensitive to pain from impact, but are much less likely
            to b2e permanently damaged by a blow.  Testicular pain is particularly
            suitable for incapacitation in that it is intense, prolonged and tends to  keep
            the subject in a doubled up position. The fact that testicular function is  not
            permanently impaired by intensely painful impact is  indicated  by  the  rarity
                                                                                              10
            of major testicular injury in contact sports where rigi2d shielding is not worn.
            Peripheral nerves are pain sensitive organs b   ut usually are too deeply
            buried in other soft tissues to be directly effected by non-penetrating impact;
            the only common exception is the "funny bone, " actually the ulnar nerve
            at the elbow.  As previously noted,  impact to muscle can cause painfully
            persistent muscle spasm of  the  "charley  horse"  variety.  Although  scienti-
            fic proof is lacking, c2urrent medical opinion regards the painfully "paralyzed"
            upper extremity from a "rabbit punch" or "karate  chop"  to  the  lateral  base
            of the neck as voluntary immobilization of the extremity  due  to  the  painful
            spasm of shoulder muscles, rather than any direct effect on the deeply
            buried motor nerves to  the  extremity.  Large  volumes  of  muscles  could  be
            struck with relative safety as follows: buttock, thigh,  calf  and  any  aspect
    0        of the shoulder except the front and tip where bones are shallow.
                                                    20-

           E.  Physiolorical Conclusions
           Pain is the most easily obtained mode of."safe" incapacitation by non-
           penetrating impact.  High velocity, low mass impacts anywhere on the
           skin surface can cause transient stinging skin pain with little risk of
           serious injury to the subject.  Slightly heavier blows directed to bony
           areas can cause severe periosteal pain.  Still heavier blows to large
           muscle masses can cause painfu2l muscle spasm, and probably some de-
           gree of paralysis of the body part involved.  The most incapacitating,
           relatively safe pain is probably that from testicular impact, with no
           comparable point of aim available in the female subject.
           The painful apnea of a heavy low velocity blow to the epigastrium remains
           a medical enigma.  The physiologic mechanism that stops all respiration
           is unknown and there is no quantitative information available t2o estimate
           the effectiveness of blows with varying mechanical characteristics.  In
           general, blunt trauma to the abdomen leads to poorly predictable and some-
           times fatal results.  A highly developed system to incapacitate by "solar
           plexus punch" impact could possibly prove to be about 500/o effective with
           only 20'7o serious injury and 501o mortality under favorable field conditions.
           Effectiveness could prob2ably be raised, but only at the expense of in-
           creased morbidity and mortality.  These figures are strictly speculative
           and the actual values of any system would have to be proved in field trials.
           True cerebral concussion has been the subject of much medical, engineering
           and interdisciplinary study.  In spite of all this effort, many aspects of the
           concussion problem continue to defy detailed analysis.  The fact remains
           that the most able in2vestigators, controlling a large number of variables,
           and using corr,71etely incapacitated experimental animals under carefully
           defined. laboratory conditions, have been unable to define the head impact
           that will reliably cause concussion with only a low risk of permanent brain
           damage.  This result will certainly not be achieved under field conditions
           until it has been achieved in the laboratory.  At the present state of knowledge,
  7                                               21-

         it may be hypothesized that a concussion system 95'7o effective under
         favorable field conditions would cause permanent brain damage in about
         5017/o and sudden death in about 107a of cases.  Lesser hazard could pro-
         bably be achieved at the expense of effectiveness.
         The blow to the head might be put in a more favorable light if significant
         incapacitation could be proved for sub-concussive impacts.  Most inves-
    2     tigators mentioned above defined concussion in strict terms to mean a deep
         level of unconsicousness, often with the loss of certain basic reflexes.
         A smaller decrease in the level of consciousness might well suffice in
         certain personnel incapacitation situations.  Available information does
         not allow any worthwhile estimates of the mechanical characteristics, effec-
         tiveness or hazard of such impacts.
         Impacts to the'face and anterior neck sh7ould not be used in most incapacita-
         tion situations.  The likelihood of permanent injury to eyes, other facial
         structures or larynx would be high, and the area offers no special modes
         of incapacitation other than blindness which is likely to be permanent.
                                               22-

                                    IV.  Other System Factors
           A.  Rai-ig
           All impact effects aside from skin pain will be initially dependent upon
           point of aim and the subject's,orientation and posture.  Such dependence
           is likely to restrict the range of impact systems severely, at least for
           systems that are reasonably reliable and offer some degree of safety for
           the subject under a variety of field conditions.  A perfectl2y aimed low
           velocity missile will not hit properly if the subject turns or moves between
           the time of firing and the time of impact.  At best, systems with ranges
           longer than arm's reach would seem to be useful only in situations where
           the subject is: (1) relatively motionless in the first place; and (2) unaware
           of the action being taken against him.  Direct rhanual control, so that  direc-
           tion and velocity can be corr2ected continuously up to the  moment  of  impact,.
           would seem to be the only reasonably safe way to deliver a heavy blow to
           a moving and/or wary subject.  At the present state of knowledge, systems
           causing skin pain are likely to be the only safe and effective ones having
           ranges greater than a few meters.
           B.  Covertness
           Properly designed impact incapacitation systems should be relatively quiet
           and unobtrusive in operation.  T0he subject's response is likely to be noisy
           except in cases where a concussive blow, the solar  plexus  punch  or  testicu-
           lar impact had been used.
           C.  Duration of Incapacitation
           Estimated durations of incapacitation  by  non-penetrating  impacts  are  shown
           in Table IV.
                                                   23-

                                            TABLEIV
                         ESTIMATED--DURATIONS OF INCAPACITATION
                                 FOR NON-REPETITIVE: LMP.AC.TS
                     Mode of                                      Estimated
                  Incapacitation                                  Duration
                  Pain:
                     Skin                                    less than 5 seconds
                     Periosteal                2              less than 10 seconds
                     Testicular                              5 secconds to  several  mins.
                     Muscle spasm                            5 seconds  to  several  mins.
                  Solar Plexus                               less than 1 minute
                   Concussion                                10 seconds  to  several  hrs.
           Light impacts, such as those causing skin or periosteal pain, can be safely
   2        repeated several times to extend the time of incapacitation.
           D.  Countermeasures
           Appropriate armor and/or padding could be an effective countermeasure to an
           impact incapacitation system.  Mod..grn football helmets offer excellent pro-
           tection against blows that would have devastating effects on a bare head.
           Rigid cup-like protectors could nullify the effectiveness  of  impacts  to  the
           genital region.
           8                                         24-

                                  V.  Equipment State of the Art
           A number of projectile systems have been developed for the purpose of per-
           sonnel incapacitation without lethality, if not without serious injury. II- 13
           Other non-penetrating impact systems have been proposed.    14, 15 Almost
           all of these actual and proposed systems have been based on inadequate
           design criteria with regard to "safe" incapacitating2 impacts because, as
           explained in the previous section of this report, mechanical design criteria
           do not yet exist for most of the desired biologic effects.  With their masses
           in the I  to 5 gram range and velocities over 100 meters per second, the
           Speer .38 and .45 caliber projectiles and the Wyle .38 caliber projectile
           would clearly be unsuitable from the biologic as we 11 as the ballistic point
           of view. 11 2The test data on the second generation Scimitar flechette indi-
           cate ballistic success and biologic failure in that virtually 10070 of test
           missiles at least partially penetrated the biologic targets. 12
           The results of rather elaborate effectiveness tests on soft plastic projectiles'
           hitting the heads of experimental monkeys and baboons are shown by Table V.
           Test series II and III were conducted using "improved" techniques modified as
       2    indicated by experience.  The investigators regarded the results of the third
           series as good enough to warrant a basically favorable report on the approach.
           The results shown in Tabel V were not achieved under simulated field con-
           ditions but under rigid laboratory control, including prior complete incapa
           citation of each experimental animal for positioning purposes.  Obviously
           the morbidity and mortality rates experienced during these three seri2es of
           tests would not be acceptable for incapacitation of human subjects.
           The difficulty of developing a device that will reliably cause concussion,
           regardless of other constraints, is illustrated by the special device for
           "knocking" cattle before bleeding in slaughter houses.  This pistol-like de-
           vice is hand held between the ears of the animal, aimed and fired.  The
           blunt striker causes a depressed skull fracture, gross brain damage and,9
                                                 25-

                                           TABLE V.
                        EFFECTS OF SOFT PLASTIC PROJECTILES
                           DESIGNED TO CAUSE CONCUSSION
              Test Series                               I        II       III
            Number of animals
            Incapacitated * (percentage)
            Not Incapacitated (percentage)
            Skull fracture (percentage)
            Rapidly lethal (percentage)
                   for 5 seconds or longer
 2        hopefully, concussion.  In the small test series reported, skull fracture and
         brain damage were achieved in all cases but 167o of the animals continued to
         struggle after the first "knock" and required a second shot. 16
         Available information suggests that the only sophisticated device that has
         been proved to satisfy in any degree the objective of this report is the Reming-
         ton "Stinger" 12 gauge shotgun load. This cartridge fires  about 2 350  polyethy-
         lene spheroids about 3 millimeters in diameter and weighing  about  0.  02  gram
         each from a standard shotgun  at  unstated  velocity.  The  manufacturer  recom-
         mends that the load be aimed at the ground about a meter in front of the subject
         so as to ricochet and strike the subject below the knee only.  Reported test
         results indicate: (1) gross tissue destruction at ranges of 3 meters and less;
         (2) brief inc2apacitation by pain without serious injury at ranges between 5  and
         10 meters; (3) no effect at ranges greater than 15 meters; and  4)  appropr  ate
         clothing would be an effective countermeasure at all ranges greater than 5
         meters.
         Some ancient weapons could satisfy the requirements for "safe" incapacitation
         by pain if they are properly used.  The police baton is a case in point.  Standard
                                         4       26-

          batons in the United States are hickory cylinders about 3 centimeters in
          diameter and 65 to 92 centimeters long, weighing 380 to 525 grams.   17
          Wielded at peak velocities of 5 to 10 meters per second, these instruments
          could clearly be lethal if used indiscriminately.  Recommended police baton
          procedure is to threaten, push, or strike the subject below the knee.  Blows
                                                         18
          to the head are to be avoided if at all possible.  Broken bones are a
          definite possibility with heavy blows from a baton.
          Handheld instruments lighter than the police baton might prove useful in
          some circumstances where incapacitation could be prolonged by repeated
          impacts causing skin and/or periosteal pain.  Instruments similar to a light,
          flexible walking stick or a long riding crop could be designed so as to cause
          no permanent da1mage if the face and anterior neck are avoided.  Such an old-
          fashioned technique could be called incapacitation by flogging.  A carefully
          designed variation of brass knuckles could cause periosteal pain with an
          openhanded slap at a subject's scalp or other bony area, and at the same time
          be ready to add weight to a fist blow if required.
                                                27-

                                      VI.  Recommendations
           1.  In the light of present linowledge, the outlook for non-penetrating
           impact as a reliable agent for incapacitation without permanent  damage  is
           poor for all impact effects except pain.  It is doubtful that laboratory results
           in the next few years will justify a more favorable view of the possibilities
           of a general purpose system delivering heavy blows to the body.
   2        2. Consider the hypothetically possible results of a general  purpose  con-
           cussion system shown in Table II, page 16.  If similar results are acceptable
           as a goal, proceed with concussion system development anil field testing.
           If such results are unacceptable, abandon development of concussion systems
           until laboratory demonstration of results better than those shown in Table II.
           3.  Insist on some documentation of biologic ef2fectiveness and hazards of any
           proposed impact incapacitation technique, other than those incapacitating by
           superficial pain, before starting detailed hardware development programs.
           4.  Heavy impacts might be useful in special circumstances where the subject
           can be expected to be relatively still in a predetermined location and posture.
           For example, the space behind the pilots' seats in an airliner could be
           partial2ly covered by a large piston-like movable panel in the  overhead  or
           sidewall trim. If a hijacker moved into the proper position, a pilot  could
           trigger. the 10 kilogram or heavier piston to move down or out and hit  the
           subject at about 3 meters per second.  The effects of such an impact should
           give the pilots a few seconds in which to apply restraints or otherwise con-
           tinue incapacitation of the subject, and likelihood of permanent injury to th4e
           subject from the primary impact or any secondary impacts should be small.
           Similar'methodology might be appropriate in other special situations where
           the system can be closely controlled and rapidly followed up by competent
           operators.

          5.  Projectile systems are and will probably continue to be of Iii-nitcd
          utility if safety of the subject is of any concern.  Like the Remington
          Stinger load$ they will probably remain constrained by a minimum safe
          range and a maximum effective range that are not too far apart.
          6.  A device with a range greater than that of the human knee could prove
          useful in incapacitating males by testicular impact.  Blows deliv2ered up-
          ward between the legs offer the possibility of highly effective incapacita-
          tion with a relatively wide margin of safety, although little scientific
          information is available on this technique.
          7.  Lightweight handheld instruments on the order of riding crops could be
          used in some circumstances to incapacitate by repeated applications of
          superficial pain.  Carefully designed brass knuckles could also prove use-
          f ul.
2
                                                  29-

                                       REFERENCES
         1.  von Gierke, H. E. , "Response of the Body to Mechanical Forces,  in
                Lectures in Aerospace Medicine
                                              .j Sixth Series, USAF School of
                Aerospace Medicine, Brooks Air Force Base, Texas, 1967,
                pp 3Z6-344. (UNCL)
         2.  von Gierke, H. E. , "Biomechanics of Impact Injury, " in Im2pact Accelera-
                tion Stress, Publication 977, N..Ltional Academy of Sciences -- Na-
                tional Research Council, Washington, 1962, pp 121- 122. (T-7NGL)
         3.  Stapp, J. P. , "Jolt Effects of Impact on Man, 11 in Impact Acceleration
                Stress  Publication 977, National Academy of Sciences -- National
                Research Council, Washington 1962, pp 123-130.  (UNCL)
         42.  Williams, D. , and D. Denny-Brown, "Cerebral Electrical Changes in
                Experimental Concussion, " Brain, Vol. 64, 1941, pp 223-238. (UNCL)
         5.  Denny-Brown, D. and W. Ritchie Russell, "Experimental Cerebral
                Concussion, " Brain Vol. 64, 194 1, pp 93- 164. (UNCL)
         6.  Higgins, L. S. , R. A. Schmall, C. P. Cain, et al, ';The Investigation
                of the Parameters of Head Injury2 Related to Acceleration and
                Deceleration, " AD 659 795, Headquarters, U. S. Army Medical
                Research and Development Command, Washington, 1967. (UNCL)
         7.  Clemedson, C. J. , G. Hellstrom and S. Lindgren, "The Relative Toler-
                ance of the Head, Thorax and Abdomen to Blunt Trauma, " Annals
                of the New York Academy of Sciences Vol. 152, Art. 1, 1968,
                pp 187- 198. (UNCL)
    2     8.  Swearingen, J. J. , "Tolerances of the Human Face to Crash Impact,
                AM- 65- ZO, Federal Aviation Agency, Office of Aviation Medicine,
                Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, 1965. (UNCL)
         9.  Oxford Extra-Mural Unit, "The Wounding Power of Debris, " R. C. 423,
                Ministry of Home Security, London, 1944. (UNCL)
         10. Kleiman, A. H. , "Injury to the Testes, 11 in Encyc-lopedia of Sport S2ciences
                and Medi2iE.2_, Ed. L.A. Larson, The Macmillan Co., New York,
                1971, p 766. (UNCL)
        11.,  Bornheim, G. , "Non-Lethal Bullet Studies, " letter report SMUFA-J7000,
                U.S. Army Frankford Arsenal, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
                27 November 1968. (OUO)
                                            30-

                  (CONFIDENTIAL)
           13.
                  (CONFIDENTIAL)
           14.  Shock Hydrodynamics, Inc. , "Proposal for a Quantitative Study of
                  Non-Lethal, Non-Penetrating Incapacitating Projectiles, " Sherman
                  Oaks, California, 1970. (UNCL)
           15.  Williams, L. W. and H'J. Hucek, "A Commentary on Shot-Filled Bags
                  as a Non-Lethal Weapon for Crowd Control, " Battelle Memorial
    2              Institute, Columbus, Ohio, 1970. (OUO)
           16.  Govons, S. R. and R. A. Merkel, "Instantaneous Postural Reaction of
                  Cattle to Brain Concussion, " Aerospace Medicine, Vol. 42, No. 4,
                  1971, pp 421-423. (UNCL)
           17.  Applegate, R. , "New Riot Control Weapons, " Ordnance, Vol. 49,
                  No. 265, 1964, pp 67-70. (UNCL)
           18.  Brazeal, M. , "The9 Uses of the Police Baton, " in Crowd and Riot Control
                  Schools, Ed. J. S. Kline, Governmental Research Center, Lawrence,
                  Kansas, 1964, pp ZO-Z4. (UNCL)
                                              -31-

