                                                   ARTICLE
                                                   T-               Septa,,.nber 5 6.
         Subject: Conference an   Aircrew  Viability and Perforinance  lfoniltloring.
               to-        ]Life  Sciencer,: Research Advisory   Group..
              -:@1A. Backqround Information:
                     1. Over the past 15   2years considerable interest and     effort  has
               i.periodically been focussed on the problem of determining,:as a functi
              -4'of time and place in the flight path, the    precise  state   of
               an  aircrew   members   consciousnass,and   purposeful   responsiveness.
              -7iAlthough a  wide  range  ail,psychophysiologic  parameters  have  been
               ;.'studied and many  differe@t  technics  of  remo2te  monitoring  have
              2'been attempted, k=*  the  fact  remains  that  to  date
                                                                      ,,there  is  no
                proven operationally ur=uable system available.
                     2. Currently the  only  raliable  (reasonably)  means  of!,
                             the  pilotis  state   of:functional   responsiveness
               @is by voice communications with him throug2h the radio link.              I
              ,!;If for any reason voice  communications  are  lost  by  virtue  of
               @range,  spherics,  power'failure  or  'things  happening  too  fast
              11 in the cockpit for the,pilot to Use the radio' then, in the
               ievent of a  fatal  accident,  the  true  status  of  the.pilot  throughout
              -.-:@'the terminal emergency period may never be knotin.' It is a'well-known
               ,fact that a significant Per cent3ge of fatal accidents are listed
              !-,,,as 'couse unknown.' As a:corolla.'-y to  this  latter.fact  is,the
               ,rather dubious indirect  inference  which  is  drawn  to  the  factor
                of 'Pilot erro.-I or 'hypoxial-as@being the basic     Lcausative   factor!,
               !all 2of which might well tonstitute a completely       ar*.-oneous,conclusion.
                     3. Newcomers to the,rieio or'   physio@ogic monitoring    'are frequent
              171,perplexed as to why, with all of;the  work  going  an  in  NASA,  DOD
               ';NIH R&D groups, we have yet  to  fly  an  operationally  proven  and
              1-1@rel2iable system. The simplest reply to such a  query  is  %'.o:sta  a  a
              ,Ino system thus far has been able,to satisfy all the requirements
               ,(and constraints imposed) set  by@:such  factors  as;@pilot  comfort'.  &I
               :mobility;  aircraft  electronics  &,pomer  supply;  reliability   ol'
              ..@the indicat                  o theiman
                            dr(s) provided t            itor.at  his  observation   post.'
              --!It is unfortunately  true.that  with  all  of  the  equipment,  personnel
              -.-@and flying hours availa'bie to those of us: in the Armed Services,
               ,we h3ve yet to justify  and  mount.a  pr:gam  which,  over  a  period
              :.'iof reasoble time, would give us a  usable  solution  to  this  very
                     4.
               2llmpor6ant  problem.  Perhaps,  with  the  newly-i-njected  interest
              Z..;.of the FAA and the Commercial  Airlines generated by rotthcoming
               ;flight  test  and  bperational  use  of  the  SuperSonic   Transport,
               ;.we may be able to  focalize  our  interests  and  integrate  our
               ':rssources in a more productive  program  than  we  have  had  in the 6post.

                                                     'Z 0 1 TO.-,
                                                     ARTICLE 7!0.
                                  10
                                                                    rl
                                                              T
                    DirF!c,6,i,ons of C
                                     ur:ent  Proorzmse
                     2  1* Prev!Lcus reference has breen made'                          @,hel
                                                               to the  fact  that:,, at &
                 present  time there are a large number of@                         hich
                                                               programs underway   w
                  )nt       rious degrees of infere6ce in this Particular problem.
                 C2C  a 1 Fh
                          ya
                 N/@SA co inues to support   a broad s'pec'ru;i of research  and davelope=
                 ment in  this  area  of  physiological  monitoring  and  data  retrbeval,  mu
                 of which has,  at  the  very  laaa'6,what  could  be  calledlnegative  valual
                 to  this  specific  requirementf  since  their  operet4onal  and   Scientific
                                                        broader-based@than thi
                 one. The term Inegativervaluet is applied only in the co        s  Particl-ua
                                                                                ntext that
                 we can use the results of their R & D Programs as indicators that,
                 certain avenues of approach are niether feasiblei
             2                                                           or practic:l for
                 our specific objectives., These areas Of investigation are camcern'@ed
                 CiP811Y with  the  sensing'of  a  fairly  large  amount  of  pscyho-physioloc
                 data which when properly coded,,   icross-referenced@and integrated can
                 be stored on board, read out on a rapid time sequence or;2used           i
                 indavidually and/or collectively to signal a significant;;:hange in
                 viability or performance                                       I  .
                                            to-ground monitors or other companion crew
                 members. This isn't at all to say that if a simple type of viability
                 or performance indicator based upon a new principle were':devel2oped
                 thay would have no use for itv but rather that because of their
                 broad operational requirementsf!they must work toward mo
                                                                               re   comPIcated
                 and sophisticalted systems than@'this objective oesprtsents.
                     2. In a similar se
                                                   :DOD aerospace medical efforts in
   2              the biatelemetry field   are largely directeds toward the Irather
                 complex and sop
                                 histical.-ad systems of p B'rsonal monitoring' as
                 are envisioned as  being  required  for  the:MOL  program.  Although  o@e  fi
              I  considerable disperse interest  elxpressed!by  opera-"6,ional  flight  surgeo
                 assigned to flight eq4-- test'ac'tivitiesiand in some
                                                                           AF special
                 projects,,, one doesnot find amo large scale interett-backed up by     1
                 financial support withind'ihe ffIR&O  commands for:a device of
              i  such seeming simpltitiy. One might even 'sav that:the operational
                 people can, in effect, ;ee no just2ificat:
                                                            ion
                 a capability.                                   in o@veloping such
                     3. If one then looks over    "nto t     linicall!
                 intensive care monitori          1      he                  ul the
                                         ng prc)iects supported by NIH, there is
                 found virtually the same type   Of closely contai2ned interest and
                 directions; namely the-attainment of a reliable capability to
                 sense and display with grebb rapidity, mingto and detailed chaanges
                 occurring in a patient who already is in a state!of criticality. --
                 and therefore represents no true gnalogue of our-human catiFl5bF-ribntl
                 in his operational environment and 2milieu. Again, as in the case,
                 of the NASA and DOD work, their is undoubtodlp some guidance
                 which we can obtain from the NIH    work which may prove of value
                 but at the same time the glib coordinators must realize that there
                 is no direct and easy extrapolation from the sick room to an air
                 craft nor from a severely ill or damaged patient to the (ini-tially)
                 healthy air crew f0R member.

                 -- ----------
                                                 ':&)ITOr
                                                 A,?TICL.-  @.10.
                                                                              T-,-r
              C. Summary    of Curre
                                   nt  st3tus-
                    1. There is no  (kn:own)  RD:'&  T  program  2in the field of phsy"oloc
              Cal  monitoring which h3s.as its   principal  objective,   the ability
              to reliably  d6ermine  the  functional  and  responsive  state of the
              aircrew member under operational'conditions,
                    .2    The obje'
                                 ctives @of on-going NASA!Iand 000@programs   in th
                                                            2                       is.
             area of biotechnology are primadily directed      toward;
                            a. improving the quality and   quantity of.bia-signals'
                            b. integrating and  @automatizing 'Certain bio-variables
                            in order to provide!more significant and readily
                            interpretable real time information@to the ground
                            medical  mo2nitors  for flight,safety  decisions.
                            C. to  facilitate  and validate  the  read-out,and
                                                 a.rge amounts of in-flight   ps
                                                                               cho-
                            interpretation of 1.
                            physiological data  @for bbth.short and long   range
                            research  studies.
           2                 d. to provide greater comfoit and mobility     to the
                            flight crew' in wearing the bio-sensot rigs.
                                                           valid
          -L-:j                       I        I
                            e. to oplomize the :amount   Of/bio-information'
                            handled within the @prescribed  limitations   of
                            power,  band-width an2d  recording  modes   available.
                   3. The   objectives!of on-gaina_ programs,in   this  area
                   being prosecuted  under  the  aegis  of  the  Government!
                   Health   Agencies are primarily directed tc;uard the
                   improvement in the institutionalized care of the sick
                   pericularly under:critical conditions requiring
                   'intensive   care.11
                   4._Fringe  areas  of interest  such  as  are   gawdd-expressed
                   in a wide variety'of uncoordinated      projects and programs
                   are found in such:fields as; sport:   medicine-    industrial
                   health & hygeine;.parachuting & sky diving@Lnd undermater
                   exploration and habitation. The principal results to date
                   of these programs  which  have  some5  ancillary  bearing  on
                   our specific objective are:
                            a. the improvement of the wearability of the   bio-
                            monitoring rigs  by individuals working (or  pilaying)'
                            under a wide variety of/activities.
                                         environmental conditioms and

                                                  EDITCP
                                                  frTICL" ' @io.
                                           r---                  @-r-T I
                      b. in general, the data obtained     through  the  use  of   thesei
                      various rigs  have-been  of'poor  quality  with  poor  signal  tc)'
                      no2ise ratios with   all of  them suffering   from the same
                      set of factors, name'Ly: e'xcessive'mobility     and poor
                      conductance of the body sensors; excessive       interference from a
                      louts;-de.' noise sources; inadequate transmitting power
                      available and ccncomil@ant poor receptivity and signal
                      discrminati-on at the dis2play and/or recording station.
                      c. In those experiments from which      interpretable  data    has
                      been  obtained the  principal  conclusions   reached   have   been
            7i'       03 rO'LlOWS:
                                       man generaliy @iiuw5   a wide@  variation in
                                   physiological systems response (pulse        resp)
                 2                  throughout   his daily activities   than   previously.
                                   held.
                                   ii -   the anticipation  of a difficult or   potentially
                                   hazardous  task@'evokes  greater  response  than   in
                                   the S'ubsequent;actuall. perfo-.zmance of it.
                                   iii -:@Training, past experience    and a  42ood
                                   indsx'of  physical   fitness   significantly   reduce
                                   the d@graa of ':response; 'lessen   the  total   body
                                   burden'.
               D. Proposed Work to be Carried Out at                  iiia o 1 c:-i L e n L p- Z'
                       1.  Through  his  past 4-5 y'sars work in the     Cardio-vascular
           2    Labora'6bry u@iit  within  the FAA CL-RI complex  which  has  since  been
               disbanded with putial relocation at
               has ddvsloped a highly skillad ",-eam    of scientists  and  tschnicibns-
               capable  of  carrying  out':extensive  and  detailed  studies   ar.c3rdia-
               respi-atery  function.  Equipment  and  instrumentation   provj2ldes   for
               a wide range of functional studies under@both normal and stressful
               si.tuations, with complete facilities for@data retrieval and
               correlation. In addition to his o-xn team, he has the privilege
                                                             cialized biomedical
               of calling upon additional experts in spa
               fields for guidance from the faculty members of the
  3             Medical Cemter.  His program of contiuad research is        being
               partially suppotted by

                                                  T.' 7.
               r i
                     2.  Subj3ct population  for use by Dr.           '@group in
             'their furthgr experimental studi--s is largely
                                                                cornposed of
             :flying personnel and air  trafo'ic controlgrs, the majority  of  whom;!
              have baen  followed2 by '%"he     for at least 4 years.  A%'Jditi:3nal
             ,subjects are readily available from the student body    and also
            .--;,as volunteers fro,-,i the local govern-ment a=ga6;-zations.
            -ii      3. Within the above subject pbpulation group    are a   number
              of individuals with proven coronary disease who have been     quite   i:
             iextensively studied on a cont:bn2uing basis. Displaying a wide         i
             .vari3ty of 'patterns' of  cardio-vascular  malfunction  in  the  form
             /,,of blectro-mechanical and acoustical  abnormalities,  they  provide
                template of sorts against which  can  be  measured  certain  patterns
            --Iiof early changes in 'normal' individuals whyckhay prove useful
              in predicting 'pre-coronary' susceptibility,
                     4. Based on a pr2emise-that   these same  early, abnormal responses
            1,@ifound in both aged pilots and those  with  coronary  disease  might  be
             .indicative of degraded cardia-vascu'Lar  function in  a younger
            ".."individual with poor,  intrinsic  strass-response  characteristics,
             :it would appear feasibleland potentially valuable to join with
              this group, in the Furtherance of.our own   studies.
                     52. In addition, (to the r'eason given in #4   above)  it  wouldi
             ibe equally valuable for      ito have immediately available, a
            1.@@icomplately equipped and operating laboratory research facility
             I
             lwhich would allow a quick reacting capability to    asses and evaluate
            izinew technics and procedures for  possible  fur"@her devakopement
             !and opera'6,ioaal trial.

