                                                 RESEARCII PLAX AND SUPPORTL'IG DATA
                                               THZ
                          ReseArch Plan
                          Introduction -xni Specific Aims:
                          Incrcased proficiency, In performance, decreased marbicu- tj from illness, lncrea-sed
                          lonpevity and similar  claims  for  improved  bealtis  status  have  bee.-k  Dropo3ed
                          as benefits of re;;ular physical exercise.      In  certain  populations  i  reeialar
                          jVmnastic5 are a part of daily life from childl,,ood io advanced age.         In P
                          f@--ctor-f vorkers "break" not fo2r  coffee  and  a  cigarette,  but  for  ca2esthe;.ics.
                          African nomadz, herders by vocation and  necessi.,@,,/  of  life,  with  a  diet  con-
                          P&r-@ible to that Cound in Western societies but who walk uo to forty miles a day
                          a.re repo.-ted to have nefpligible  coronary,  artery  ard  ischelaic  hea2rt  disease.
                          A dccm-rlse in ldhysic&l exer.-ise has  been  related  to  an  inerersed  incidenc-3  of
                          coronary  and  lschemic  he&rt  disease.  In  this  setting,   the   sedentul   lire,
                          lospurt" activity  has  been  i--icriminated  in  acute  ischemic  --pisoles.  Wnether
                        2  directly reiated or  whether  one  of  several  conditionino,  or  pr-edis-oosing  factors,
                          most investig,%tors now aeree that sedentary living is not condue-@ve, through
                          several Dossible mechaLnisms , with good cardiov"cvlar health.
                          P'nysica.1 exercise has been f3ur-oortA-d  to  be  of  theraoeutic  benefit.  It  has
                          been prescribed in the  treatment  of  obesity.  In  musculstr  and  skeletal  diso!-dt-r3,
                          is routi.-ie in  general  rehabilitation  from  acute  ard  chronic  disease,  is  en-
                          cour-aged post--oo(-ratively to precl,.;@  pulmonary  embolism  and  is  recc=e@!sdL-4
                          following acute myocardial inf&rction In the hope that inter-coronary artery
                          anastomo-,is will  increase.  Physical  medicine  is  part  of'  the  theral5y  of  anoolev
                          from iti  onset  to  recovery.  Other  examples  could  be  cited  and  the  physi4:ians
                          re@,,@ar'@id.,uonil.ion to p;Ltient3 is to exercise refrulmrly,.
                          The pft 'ioloo
                                 ys     ,y of exercise has been the subject of intensive study, especially
                          since the  Seco@-.a  ';orld  War.  The  resuiratory  and  eirculatorr  adaotations  to
                          exercise stres2s  has  been  studied:  ii  acute  mild  to  s4tver,-  exercise  stress;
                          during supine and upright  exerci:;e;  in  thi  field  and  in  the  laboratory-,  II
                          ficonditik>ned" and "uncondilloned" subj-!cts; in  viriou3  occupatio.-lal  i,,rou'05.
                                                                          4
      2                    In age groups from childhood to old *,_,; during and sometime after acute
                          circulatory di!se5tler- and In velrious  dl,.epse  state%.  including  clironic  ltn,4
                          dir,o-:a-te, di,,.tbet#-s mellitus and situatioiis of chronic ry,.tolle 2 and  di=tolic
                          left ventricul;tr ovorl.oaa.    Despite thi3 tremendour. i%ffort, there is much tlirlt
                          rem,-iins obsetire iibout the rc3pon:@e to physical  work.  t4'nile  what  hmopens  in
                          variow, situations, in x--spon-7@c to this stress. ir2, known, ho,6r nnii ±@L it  h-tppor,-,
                          is lt-rs -clear. In -nany of. there cl.udies , the resul t-- -ire  not  consistent,  the
                          n,=nles are ;mill, the strfss Is v-.%riable  and  the  results  are  of  questiontloIF-,
                          statistical sippnific.3-Lnce in extr.,spolation to Do-,)ulations  or  pen-!r3l  rroups,

                              "hys i-,'Ll    lae ha3 bet---i e.,tnloyed as a diagnostic tool:   to
                              rI.r.oir,"tory and eircu-tttorl adequacy; to detem-ine and to Iuantite@e
                              fitness; to est,%bliah functional or aerobic capaci-y and  Nnc+.io.-ial  re.,ie:-rieb
                              for p.-iysical work in(i to diagnose or detect  lsitert  ischenic  heti&.  disease  in
                              ag(- eroups -it high risk from covert coronary hcp--t disen-se.  The st:tndard
                              exercise toler-Lnet% test (-.%Insters) has bee2n clarifiL4d ar. to tritorca
                                                tn Iorns of der,-.%-a oC positivlt_v ('Llobb and ','iarkz) 41.4rou,%h
                              'U@(i eL.Inical ccrrr%lations. While this test  detectr,  advinced  coronart  lse6trt
                              disc,L:-,e, it is insensitive to mild or  moderate  degrees  that  r-ay  be  equally
                              hkzrlriour, by locatioft or other me-ins to overt lsc-he.,nic heart disease.     The
                              stuflies emolovino, graded and maximal exercise  str--ss  (Bruce,  I!elle.-Stein)  ho-vc-
2                              nrrl,md a mori! sensitive method of detecting si@nificant coronax-f artery
                              -iisea,se at an early stage.   Such  sensitivity  is  essential  if   methods   availablc
                              or rte-.reloped, tim to be at)plied to p-ovent the overt  expression  of'  t:-iis  prG2eesT
                              .-w clinical ischeue he-irt disease.
                              Fror-. the atudies avrtil.%ble ,then, it is clear that no one para.-.ieter
                              ch.-tracl.or,'.ze in indiv-Ldu.-tll.,i -ohysiolof;ic or cardiovascular healt'.11 status at a
                              2,,iv@-,n point in ti,,ic. The b3tly milieu is d,,In=ic and  therefo--e.  dynamic  te3l@ing
                              Vill best, tictseribt% its resp..)nso charzteteristic-3 ard health ste@u3.  Throug7n 6.1.@e
                                'licatio.i of physical  exerci2se  as  a  stressor,  eipecially  if  suf,i,@ient  stre-qs
                              app                                                                      4.
                              is  applied,  and  through  the  measurement  of  multiple  reszonse  character  stics
                              or pa.-amcters, a phystologi: portrayal of an lndi,,idual can be described.
          2                    '.Io.-e o,
                                   -rer, siich a portrayal  -,rill  remain  relativv  constant  unless  improved  by
                              physical tr,%Lning or deteri.:orelted by intercurrent illness or dit;ease.  Health
                              3t,itus cm  therefore  be  des,:ribe4  and  follcved  in  terms  of  functional 2 canacity
                              and reserve.
                              Throup,b the application  of  these  methods  to  nomp-I  subjects,  in  quantity  and
                              thrc4n longitudinal as  well  as  verlticgll  observations  in  differert  ame  -.rou-vs;
                              through identical observations  in  subjects  at  high  risk  for  circulator.-f  d2is-
                              orders; and In  patholoilical  groups  suitably  matched  vith  the  nor-.als,  the  -
                              natural bistory  of'  both  normal  and  disease-affected  circulations  c3i  be  evolvc-d
                              in f@mctional temi.
                              Thin Approftch to  eirculatocy  study  of  fwction 2 and  health  also  Drovides  an  0-p-
                              portunity  to  test  methods  and  techniques  and  to  evalaate  inscrunentation  for
                              the optimum Pipplication of the stress.  In a rimilar way, the off(-ctz of exercise
                              str-as, beneficial or detrimental, of varied types and mode of anplic.-ition can bob
                              evaL2lu.L-tted to do-termine vhich will provicle 'the m:%ximurn therar>eutic effect in
                              diseased states.
                              1-i simnary. the plan of investipa@.ion is ba-scd ii;kork the hy-pothesis that
                              dyn.tmte tcstinr, yields much more  mePningru.1  inf-or-n2ation  about  health  status
                              than.Gt.-itit teatink ind that physical exercise can be used as a research tool
                              to dqtcrrine and quantitate  cardiovo-,.cu-lar  health  statu3-,  to  detect  latent
                              13chcmic h@-,%rt digea!,el %nd, @%-. a ther-%pautle ar-w-nt, be used to reverse  the
                              decrements in circulatory function produced by 4iseise.

                     Methods of Procedure:
                     Ceneral Method:
                     rach subject will serve as his own control for I*ngitudinal study.  In addition,
                     each subjezt will be paired with another normal subi-ect in a different age
                     group and with a pathological control with a specific abnormality of the
                     circulation.  This pairing or2 matching will be by background. amount of training
                     or ptiysical exercise, body surface area, lean body mas and similar parar.*ters.
                     Subject Selection:
                     Norm;il subjects will be accepted as volunteem for this program from the
                     commlinlty available for study.  'Nor.-.ality" will be determined by the screening
                     eval2uation described below.
                     The study group, at high risk from coronary artery and ischemic heart disease,
                     will.also be determined by the screening procedure.  Allocation to this grouo
                     will. be according to such indicators'of coronary artery disease as, suggestive
                     histor-y or physical findings, asymptomatic positive Double Masters test
                     lschemic St 2segments           I on Screening Procedure, LAD or RVI patterns on
                     ECC, asymptomatic aqu-ired @undle branch block or other conduction disturbance*
                     suspect of heart disease, elevated serum cholesterol, serum triglycerides,
                     seriim uric acid or clinical &out, a strong family history of heam disease or
                     other circulatory disorders, diastolic hypertension, Diabetes Hellitus2 (clinical
                     or latent) and obesity.
                     Groups of pathological controls for the above two eroups will be accepted by
                     referral from the,out-p@tient services of
                                                              and from physicians within the Coma-unity.
                     .rn addition, pathological study groups will be established in the follcwing
                     disease categories:
               2      1.  Chronfc Lung Disease
                     2. Chronic Systolic Load, Left Ventricle
                     3. Chronic Diastolic Load, Left Ventricle
                     4. Cardiorryopathy:
                        a.  Ischemic Heart Disease
                        b.. Primarl Myocardial Disease
                     ;@ruqv uroup Size;
                     The nomal study proup should ultimately comprise 100 subjects in each decade
                     ,from the second through the seventh.  Each sub-group siou'@d consist of thirty
                     subjects, as a minimum number for statistical sienificance.
                                                         -3.

                           Proccdure-
                           7'hree basic procedures will be followed in this study, according to the qrou-*
                           as follOW3:
                           Proced.tre A:
                           This is ;L scret-ning technique, adapted to the study of a laree n%Lnber of test
                           subjec-i2s. It is intended ta Provide a  baseline  ca-rdiovascular  evaluation  ol,'
                           both static and dynami.c nature; to detect latent or potential circulatory
                           dizorders ir@. "normal" volunteers; to provide subjects for the group,  at  hL.Si@. e, L- k
                           fro.m ischerue heart disease and i3 the basic evaluation for &11 2subjects.
                           Procedure 3:
                           T'.@iS DrOCedure will be a more extensive evaluat@ion  of  eirculatorj  functio-ial
                           capacity and reserve.  This procedure is an out-patient evaluation thit c=
                           be acconiolis@ied In onz-half' day.  It Is intended to provide more dctalled
                           in2formation tli.-t can be extrapolated to the group studied only by Proced--.,,-c  A.
                           Information obtained in this Procedure will be useful in determinin& any
                           modifications to-.fard a more meaningful screening technique.
                           Procedure C:
                           ThLs procedure is an exhau3t2ive study of cardiovAscu-IFtr health status.  It
                           *,nploys all av,%[IaLble facilities and techniques &vrilable  within  the  i4edical
                           center, Co-iventie)ral catheterization  techniques  ani  ancillazr  radiogrgkd-hic,
                           radioisotoce and other pertinent mo.-tho2d.- of eirculatoz-f stue,,( will be  emoloyed
                           as they are pertinent to achieving the goals of this study.      @Lhis  nrocedure  is
                           in-',iouse, in-p,-Ltiont ev&luation requiring three 1.@ospital dpys.  Fxcilities  for
                           this e--riluatlan am available through the
                       2    PqO'.rc)Clr.:  ProcL-dur--A
                           1.  EAch sub.lect will sign an  informal consent aitho.-iz,-tion for study.
                               rtch subject will be interviewed by a social worker Lin(I basel4Ane socio-
                               environmental data obtained.
                                                       2                   14
                           3.  In the post-absorptive rtate, blood will be obt,,Int%d for bae-eline he.,natolo,-.y
                               vd blood chcmistry (FBS, 2 fir. post-prindlat sui,,ir, cholesterol, uric acid,
                               tot,i'L lipids, phospliolipid-- and triglycerides).
                  2         lo. Cayplete history and physical examination will be recort4ord.
                               M-iseline mcor-t-. of the f'ollowinp, will be recort4.ed:
                               a.  Electroc,-tr,liorr,%,%

                        0
                               b. -7honocardiorrFim
                               c. Vectorcardiogr=
                               d. Ballistocardiogram
                               Standard exercise tolerance test (Double Masters)
                               post-standard exercise (Double -4asters) vectorcardiog',,am
                               To2,4aL body water (tritium) and c&lcu-lated lean body m*@3s vill be dete.-mined.
                               t;ce:cise Screening:
                               ,%.   Restinig control determinations -111 be m&.ie of blood-preisure (cuff)
                                     and heart rate (RYG).
                                        ".r possibl2e, blood pressure vill be obtained throti@@out the
                               b.    ldhere
                                     test procedure from an in<tdelling arterial needle in a brachiil ox@-try.
                                     The blood pressure, in this instance, wil-I be directly obt,-.ined to.-%ethc-r
                                     with'the intep,.raa and First derivative of the 2pressure oulse.
                               c.    Arterial oxyfen content will be monitored by ear oximetry.
                               4.    lihere direct arterial sampling is available, arterial blood will be
                                     obtained ror the direct determiantion Or P02, PCO2, ?4, Lacttte and
                                     r-II.-(ruv-ite.
                   2            e.    Radiocardiowram will be continuously monitored.
                               f.    YXntred air will be collected for three minutes in a Douglaz ba.,; for
                                     -baseline oxyren consumption 3nd RQ.
                               g.    The subject will then perfor.% exercise on the bicycl; or@-,ometer A@,- follc,-.,s-2
                                     (1)  50 watts (.300 KP;4/min                                        I min',.ite
                                     (P)  loo watts (600                                                 2 min-atea
                                     (3)                                                                 3 minutes
                            2              noo watts (lion r
                                      li) 31)0 Watts (1&)O KPA/min.)                                     3 rainutes
                                     -,hL- r,-.tdlocardio,-,ram will be continuously monitored euri.%- "he exercise.
                                     I.Recoriz.vill 2be oht.-%ined at each minute durini.,, and follovine, the co:---
                                     pletlon of the exercise until the r3.te tik!. returned to the control levrl.
                                     A.t the completlon or thrce minutes of the    maxinkiq a.,noun4u of ex-arcisi
                 5                    t!i,., rub.'ect, can perfom, expired -Lir will be collected i-I -L        b.LF,
                                     f,@r cne :.itnitte.  for t'@te cletcrm
                                                                       intttion of okyron conswntion Ind

                                                            Pi
                                 Ox,.-
                                     ,en coltent -.till be continuously monitored by ear oximtr:r alra       r4
                                                                                             lr-iere dirce-@
                                      of the isvel at ench increment of work to ma2xinum.
                                 arterial sampling is possible, a samole will b,- taken Surinl the LLid-pe-'.n-@
                                 of the b-i-, collection for POp, PCO-2, pH. La-etatl-' and Pyr-.ivate.
                                 I,Ihcn d,@rect arterial pressure is obtained. records of 2th? integral of'
                                 the nressure pulse Rnd the first derivati,.re. of' pressure will be obtained
                                 at each minute durinst exercise and each minute folla-rin!r, exercise until
                                 the pressure has returned to control levets.
                         PI-IOTO@.OG:  Procedure D-
                         21.   7he subject will hat* comoleted procedure A and have been selected ac-
                              cording to the criteria outlined above under "Selection."
                         2.   The ;ub,ject vill be allowed a rest period in the,- laborator-/ un,Vll bloo;i
                              pressure Rnd heart rate are stable.
                              Rro will be attached wd contin2uously monitored.
                              Cournand needles will be inserted into & convenient arterl and vein; tha
                              former for arteritl blood samplinst And oressiire monitoria?,; the latter
                              for the injection of indicator substances and other test mate--ials.
                              Con-.rol rpcor4inr, of '.,ieFtrt2 rate and pr--ssur--, pres3ure i.-iterrcl and
                              derivative will be obtained.
                         6.   A Vgtl!3,,tlva -naneuver vill then be executed and the changes in DreS3ure =d
                              and h#,art rate.continuously monitoied and recorded.
                         7.   Wht--i2 the subject' is stable as shown by heart rate and pressum. expired
                              air will be collected in a Douglas ba,3 @,or t!irce minutes for tie deter.-dnatir,,-k
                              of'       cons=ption and RQ.
                         8.   During the second minute of the collection of expired air: oh arterial blood
                              a&,n-ple 2vill be obtained for POL), PCO2. pq, Lactate and P.,truvate (12 cc..)
                         0.   Folloving arttrial sampling, duplicate -determinations of car,!!,Lt outniit
                              will be made by the indicator dilution technique.
                         Part II:  Exercise at 100 Watts (U'00 Kp;4/min.)
                              G%ib.ject will txercise on the Floi5cli bicycle arqometetr for seven minutes.
                              A@t42rirLl ortasurg. prcss'urc integral and fir-,t deriv-Ative an! heart rate
                              will be continqou5ly monitornd and record2 t,%ken of this re3r)onse8 it c:tch
                              m!rLut,- durin!t exerciae and -it eac.,i minute folio-.ring exercise until these
                              p.-,r:uniter3 have returned to the control leveli.
  *V

                          At the end of the 4th minute, expired air will t-e collected in a Douglas
                          bag for one    thr-;e minutes.
                          At the start of the fifth minu:e, an arterial blood sample will be
                          obtained for PO., PC021 pH, Lactate and Pyruwate.
                          Cardle-, output will then be determined by the Indicator diliition te2chnique.;
                      Part III:  Exercise at 200 Watts (1200 KgM/Uin.)
                      1.  Part 11 will be repeated at tlis level of work.
                      Part IV:  Exercise at 300 Watts (1800 KSM/min.)
                      The criterion-for continued testing at the higher wcrk levels will be a return
                      to near control levels of heart rate ar-d-blood pressure.
  2                    The criteria for maximal exercise stress will be an exercise level which the
                      subject cannot sustain for mcre than  four minutes, up  to  seven  minutes.  That
                      is, the maximal amount of work which any given subject can carry out for
                      a full seven minutes will be considered his maximum.  other criteria which will
                      be used to deter-mine that the test was maximal and that a ste2ady state existed
                      at the time of @data aquisiticn are;
                      1.  Heart rate of 170 or more at the two peak levels of   work, -,hat is, at  the
                          peak level of exercise for seven minutes and a similar rate increase at the
                          exercise level of failure.
                      2.  Agreement of exoiratory volume and a plateau in c)cygen consumption.
                          (E2-ess than $00 cc. difference between two consecutive levels of work in
                          V02)-
                      3.  RQ and @2 uptake/minute/K2.
                      Wher,ever pcrssible, the following data will be aquire:i both at rest  and.during
                      each exercise period:
                                  and PCO2 gradient.
                      1-  A-a P02
    2                  2.  External recording of apex  and base phonocardiogram with apexcardiogram.
                      PROTOCOL:  Procedure C
                      The proqedures used in this portion of the study  will  combine  exercise  stress
                      and the determination of hemodynamic response by intra-cardiae @echniques.
                      The specific procedure will depend upon the pathological problem under considera-
               2       tion but will be directed to the measurement of the same parameters determined
                      in the other protocols.  Angiocardiograohle, radio-isotope and other indicated
                      ancillary mthods will be used as indicated to obtain the required data (eg.
                      cornary arteriography).
                                                             -7.

                          DATA ACCUISIT'LON:
                          The raw data obtained directly In analotue form during  the  test  procedures  will
                          be obtained using a multi-channel photographic  recorder  and  simultaneously  z*-
                          corded on magnetic tape In either analocue or digital form (after A-0 conversic@rz).
                          The raw data 2obtained by interview (Social and environmental bisto6, medical
                          history) and by physical examination will be recorded  by  the  examiner.on  suit-
                          able forms (check sheets), key punched and card filed or placed on ptalmetic tave,@,
                          rree field-data will be provided for.  All diagnoses will comply with the Intei--
                          national nomenclature and the diagnosties.functional  and  th*rapeutic  clas-sifi-
                          cations of the New York Heart Association and wi'@l be adliered to for cardiovascil@lar
                          classification.
                          A dictionary of terms has been compiled for the above purposes and for the deyivcd
  2                        physiologic parar-aters. Programs for the ADP of raw data  to  obtain  the  derived
                          data is now in process.
                          Automatic data processing equipment Is available for this work  on  a  time  avail-
                          able basis at the present time and other facilit@-'es can be employed, should f%mds
                          be available.
                          The followinr
    2                                  ,. parameters will be measured, as noted below an,,l on the  following
                          two tables'.
                          1.  Cardt.o-pulmonary Index:
                              Age + vital capacity (100 ml.) t breath holding  (sec.)  t  Pressure  breathing
                              (mm. Hr.)
                              Systolic pressure + diastolic pressure + bea--t rate
                              The normal value La 1.000; values below 0.752 sufgest impairment of
                              cardiovascular function.
                          2.  RKG analysis; (interpretation according to a-.tached ZCG co4e)
                          3.  Dcubl'  Masters analysis; (positive, negative. equivocal)
                          4.  Analy:is of2 phonocardiop,,ram..with other parameters to deterrane q'I time,
                              mechanical systole, ADC, VDG, etc.
                          S.  Ballistocardlogram (see attached code)'
                          6.  Ma)ilmal exerc,.se and exercise screening (see Tables 1, 2).

                             TABTZ I                       PARAMETERS HEA-SURED
                               Farameter                                              Dimension
                             1.  "eight                                               feet, Inches; meters
                             2.  Weight                                               pounds; kilograms
                             3.  Bo2dy Surface Area                                    square u*ters
                             4.  Fat free body mass                                   kilogranis        p
                             S.' Total  body water                                    liters
                             6.  Filse  rate                                          beats per  minute
                             7.  Systolic pressure                                    mm  Rg.
                             B.  Diastolic pressure,                                  mm  Mg.
                             9.  Mean Pressure                                        mm  Mg.
                           io.   rntegral of pressure
                           11.   First derivative of pressure                         mm Pg./see.  (delta -/del4.a T)
                           12.   First derivative duration, A-B                       mi2lliseconds
                           13.   DA duration, onset to peak                           millo@seconds .
                           14.   S!Pstolic ejection period                            milliseconds
                           15.   ltemoglobin                                          gran@s
                           16.   Arterial P02                                         mm  mg.
        2                   17.   Arterial PCO2                                        mm  Pg.
                           18.   Ar-torl J. pH
                           19.   Ameri:L  .laclata (LO, Lni.                          mg. t
                           20.   Ar-terial pyruvate (PO, P;I)                         mg. t
                           21.   Respiratory rate                                     breaths2 / minute
                           22.   Minute voluire (Vc)                                  cc.  /  minute
                           23.   End tidal                                            percent C02
                           24.   buration 0cf0gag collef,-tit)f$
                           25.   Tidal volume                                         minutes
                           26.   Anatomic dead s2pace                                  cc.
                           27.-  Physiologic'dead spaco                               --C.
                           20    VC (BTPS)                                            cc. / -.iinute
                           29:   t oxygen in VE
                           30.     carbon dioxide  in VE
                           31.     nitroeen In Ve
                           32.8   Cardiac output                                       liters   minute

                          TABLE 2                               DERIVED VARIABLES
                             Variable                                                           Dir-ensicn
                            1.  Oxygen capacity                                                cc.
                            2.  O)rjgen saturation                                             t
                            3.  Oxygen     content  2                                           cc#/100 cc.
                            '4- VI (BPTS)                                                      cc./minute
                            S.  Oxygen consumption                                             CCO
                            6.  oxyeen consumption     index                                   cc./m2
                            7.  Oxygen consumption        F.F.D.        2                       cc./Kli
                            B.  C02    p-roduced                                               CCG
                            9.  AE4piratory quotient
                          10.   Functional capacity;      functional reserv'e;
                                reserve capacity (VO2 Max.)                                    CC.
                          112.   Functional reserve index                                       cc./M2
                          12.   functional reserve / f.F.B.                                    cc./Kg.
                          13.   Cardiac     output                                             Liters       minute
                          14.   Cardiac    index                                               Liters  I  r-iny-te   M2
                   2       15.   Cardiac     output / F.F.D.                                    Liters   /   minute
                          16.   Stroke    volume                                               cc.    beat
                          17.   Stroke volume index                                            cc.    beat  i   K2
                          18.   Stroke    volume /   F.F.B.                                    cc.    beat /
                         2 19.   Mixed venous P02                                               cc.    100   cc.
                          20.   (a-v) ?02 difference                                           cc*
                          21,   Effective lefr. ventricular     work                           Kg.X    minute
                          22.   Effective stroke work LV                                       Cin.m   minute
             2             23.   Minute work index                                              Kg.M    minut*     V@2
                          24.   Stroke work index                                              Cm.M    ffdnuto    M2
                          25.   Minute work index       F.F.S.                                 Kg.M    minute     Kg.
                          26.   Stroke work index       F.F.B.                 2                Gm.M    minute     Kg.
                          27.   Mean systolic ejection rate                                    cc/systolic     see.
                          28    Total systemic resistance                                      dyne cm.-lo
                          29:   Tensio'n time index
                          30.   Physi-.tlogic  dead   space                                    CCO
                        2  31.   Anato-nic dead space                                           cc.
                          32.   Dead   space    ventilation                                    liters       minute
                          33.   Alveotar ventilation                                           liters       minute
                          34    VD  /  VT  ratio
                          35:   A-a oxygen gradient
                          36.   A-a C02 gradient
                     2     37.   XS lactate                                                     MZ.
                          38.   Lacta-e/pyruvate    r,,,Tio
                          39.   An4grobic metabolic rate
                          40.   Aerobic capacity                                               CC.
                          410   oxygen   pulse                                                 cc* V02   /   heart beat
                    2      42.   oxygen   pulse index                                           cc- V02   /   heart beat / M2
                          43.   Oxygen  pt3l$e index / F.F.D.                                  cc- V02  /   hear@t beat / Ke.
                          44.   raloric   work equivalent                                      kilocalor'@'es
                          45.   Percent efficiency
                                (t of energy transformed into work)
                          46.   Work   equ,.valent                                             Watts, eoot pounds, Kg.,m/rii
                                                                                           low]=   EMIR=

                           k
                       Significance of this ltesearch
                       A dynamic test procedure will be applied to a commmit
                                                                             .y population, at risk from
                       lschemic hea" disease.  Through a broad approach to the evaluation of test sub-
                       jects, inrluding consultations where indicated, a broad soc2ial and environmental
                       perspective and the response to stress. latent ischomic heart disease will be
                       detected. further investigation of individual subjects so  detected,  will  confizlz
                       the value of the screening technique and will provide information, allowing
                       patho-physiologic correlations In the epidemiology of coronary artery lknd iscbefFdG
                       heart disease.
                       In addition, the natural history of "normw physiologic function will be de-
                       lintated.  Results obtained in pathological groups will allow descri;ktion of'
                       decrements produced by card-iovascular disease.  The natural history of specific
                       diseases of the circulatory system will be described in funct2ional physiologierte-1--ms.
                       Within this framework, fartors will be delineated which may lead to the  early  de--
                       tection of functionally wignificant abnormalities; discovery. at a time when pr,%-
                       ventive measures may be most effective.  Within this framework, methods may be
                       tested for'their ability to arrest, retard 2or reverse the functional decrtments
                       produced by disease.
                       racilities Available:
                       The screenin g procedure -4111 require approximately 400 square feet of additional
                       space.. P-roced@re 8 can be carried out in the faci)Lities
                                                   I as currently constituted.  Procedure C  can be  acc2om-
                       plished in the in-patient facilities of the                                  jin
                       which this investigator no-4 has allocated two full work days.  Ultimately and ideally
                       this phase of the study  could  be'st bq accomplished in a'facility established within
                       ihe medical center, specifically for this purpose, that is, Cl-inical  research  ao-
       2                plied to the problems of Public Health and Preventive Medivine and the Epidemiology
                       of circulatory disease.
                       SUPPOikTI@G DATA:
                       Previous Wdrk Done in This or Related Fields:
                                                          t                             0
                       The principal investigator first carried out research in exercise physiology La
                  2     1961-62.  This involved the use of exercise iii subjects with hyperthyroidism,
                       before and after ganglionic blockade and normal su@)jects.  The overall project
                       was an investigation into hyper-dynamic circblatory states and included thyrotoxicosi
                       physical exercise and aspirin.  He and the co-investigators have been engaged in
                       Cliniical Medicine and Cardiology a2nd Clinical"Research in these fields for the.
                       past five years; for the past eighteen months as Independent investigators.
                       In the past eighteen months, 750 noinal subjects have been evaluated.  In ad-
                       dition,iL26 subjects with ;@novn disease of the circulation have been seen ',%  con-
                       sultation.  In the former group, 637 Double Masters tests have been perforr3ed.
                       (Report in preparation).  In this group, one subject was detected with ischomic

                        heart disease.  A130 in the normal group (Procedure 3),, exercise stress testing
                        has been performed in 58 subjects.  Three subjects. in addition to the one found
                        by the double Masters test, were found to have definite ischemic ST changes
                        (see attached abstract; report in preparation), (see attached tracing).
                        I2n the pathological group, the evaluation of 78 su.'@@lects with known episodes
                        of clinical ischem4c heart disease were evaluatei.  The period of observation in
                        this group averaged 8 years from the ischemic episodd.  The double Masters test
                        w,as positive in 47% of this group and negative in 53'W.  Prognosis couid not bt,
       2                 made on the basis of this exercise response, and average longevity did not 4ifftr-
                        between these two groups. kreport in preparation).  It is concluded that this
                        test does not elicit sufficient stress to determine functional capacity of.ths.
                        heart afflioted with isehemic heart disease.
                        @-he report of the first thirty subjects studie2s (Procedure S) is attached.  This
                        was supposedly a 'normal" group.
                        Also these same studies have been utilized in the past eighteen months to
                        est@blish laboratory norms and procedures and a preliminary functional rating  for
                        normal subjects.
                        Personal Publications:
                        Curriculum Vitae of Investigators Is a"ached.
               2         REVIEW Oe- PERTINENT LI-TERATURE
                        The work of Hil-1. (1) demonstrated that there was an upper limit to the ability
                        of the respiratory and circulatory system to deliv-er oxygen to the tissues during
                        heavy wo.-k.  This is the maximum oxygen_consumpticn and in normal subjects, the
                        major limiting factor 13 the status of the circulation.  2This fact was early put
                        to experimental use. Its use as a test of f-ancticn, Its limitations,  sensitivity
                        as well as its validity were conclusively demonstrated (2,3). Oxygen  conz-amption
                        at maxim-im work has been shown to de=-ease with age         to be higher in
                        upright ti,2n supine work (6) and to be a sensitive index of cardiovascular dise2ase
                        (7). For adults, it remains relatively constant unless altered by  either  disease
                        or physical training.
                        The hemodynamics of exercise have been extensively studied               The
                        entire subject his been recently reviewed (iO).-
                        The anerobic costs of mild work In health ancpin disease have been presented by
  2                      HuckaLbee (11) and In normal men and trained subjects by Bruce (12).
                        The earelse test of Masters (13) has been clarified and modified by Mattirigly
                        (14) and placed on a pathophysiologic basis through the studies of Robb and  Marks
                        (lS). 'This test however, detects ischemic heart disease only ii its advanced stages
                     2   Coronary artery dtsease is much more prevalent than its ischemic manifes%Ntions
                        and a more sensi-,ive test is needed to detect it at a time when prevention eon
                        be applied.  The studies of Bruce appear to be a more sensitive rethod but re-
                        quires wider implementation for validity to be de-.ermined (16, 17, 18).
                                                              .125-

                         Much of the cited work relates to Small numbers of subjects and the observations
                         are vertical in type.  The entire subject of physical exerc-se as an epidemglogic
                         too! to determine cardiovascular health status has been recently reviewed (19).
                         1. Hill, A.V., Muscular Activity.  Baltittore:  Williwn and Wilkins, 1926, 11S P.
                         2. Tayl*r, H.L., Buskirk, E., and Henschel, A. Saximum oxygen  intake  as  an
                           objective m@asure of cardio-respiratory performance.  J. appl. Physiol. 1955,
                           B. 73.
                         3. Mitchell, J. H., Sproule, 8. J.,, and Chapman, C. D.  The physiologic meading
                   2        of tie maximal oxygen intake test.  J. Clin. Invest. 1958, 37:538
                         4. Strandell, T.  Heart rate, arterial lactate, concentration and oxygen uptake
                           during exercise in old men compared with young men.  Act& physi*l.  scand.
                           1964.  60:197-216.
                         5. Strandell, T.  Circulatory studies on healthy -old men.  Acta mod. scand.
                           1964, Suppi. 414.
                         6. Saltin, S.  Aerobic capacity and circulation at exercise in man.  Acts
                           physiol. scand. 1964. Vol 62, suppl. 230.
                         7. Thortas, H.D., Caos, C., aid Reeves. T. J.  Resticg ameriovenous oxyeen
                           difference and exercise c-irdiac output. J. ap?l.  physiol.  1962.  17(6):
                           922-926*
                         S. Donald, K.W., Bishop, J.M., Cummini, G. and Wade, O.L.  The effect of exercise
                           on the cardiac output and circulatory dynamics of normal  subjects.  CLin.
                           Sci.  ISSS.  14:37-73.
                         9. Tabakin, S. S., 2Hanson, J. S., Herriman, T. W., and Caldwell, E. J.  ifemodynamic
                           response of normal men to graded treadmill exercise.  J. appl. Physiol.  1964:
                           19(3@:457-464.
                     10.   Asmussen, E.  Muscular Exercise in Handbook of Physiology. Section 3,
                           Volume 11; 939-978.  American.Physiological Society. 1965
        2             11.   Hucka@:)ee, W. E. -The role of a,,ierobic metabolism in the Derforrance of mild
                           muscular work.  II.  The effect of asyt@piomatic heart di;eaze.  J. Clin.
                           Invest,  1958.  37.1593
                     12.   Bruce. R. A., Jones, J. W., Strait, C. B. Anerobic metabolic responses  io
                           a;ute maximal exercise in male athletes.  Am. heart J.2 1964.  67, 5:643-650;
                     13.   Z4aster, A. M., rriedman, R. and Dack, S. Electrocardioeran after standard
                           exerc@-se as functional test of the heart.  Am ftear-t J. 1942. 24:777.
                     14.   MattimE,,Iy, T.Ul.  The postexercise electroeardiorram.  Its value In the
                           diap.nosis and proposis of coronary a8rterial disease. Am. J.  Card.  1962.
                           9:395-409
                                                           .13-

                     ANA
                   15.  Robb, G. P. and Marks, R. H.  Latent coronary artery disease.  Deterr-inat:cn
                        of its presence and severity by %ha exercise electrocardiogram.  Am. J. C:rd.
                        1964.  13:603-619.
                   16.  Doan, A. E., Peterson, D. R., Blackman, J. R., ard Bruce, R. A.  Myocardial
                        ischeMi3 allt2er maximal exercise in healthy men.  A methcd for detecting
                        potential coronaz-1 heart disease.  Am. Heart J., lS65.  69, 1:11-21.
                   17.  Doan, A. E., Pererson, D. R., Blackmon, J. R., ard Bruce, R. A.  Myocardial
                        ischemia after maximal exercise in healthy men.  One year followuo of
                        physically active and inactive men.  Am. J. Card.., 1966.  17, 12.9-190
                   18.  Bruce, R. A., Blackmon. J. R., Jones, J. W., and Strait, G.  Exercise testine,
                        in adult normal subjects and cardiac patients.  Pediatr;-cs; 1963. 32:742.
                   19.  rox, S. M., and Skinner, J. S.  Physical activity and cardiovascular
                        health.,  Am. J. Card., 1964. 14, 6:731-745.
     8                                                         -14-

                         PERSONNEL-.
                         Personnel Available:
                         1.  Phy5icians  (2)
                             ao
                             b.
                         2.  Technicians (2)
                             A,
                             b.  Vacant
                         3.  Secretarial Staff (1)
                             a*
              2           Personnel  Desired:
                         1.  Physicians  (1)
                         2.  physiologist, exercise (1)
                         3.  Anthropologist (1)
                         4.  interviewers (2)
                             (Social service and Community Health trained)
                         S.  Pegistered liurse (1)
                         6.  Technicians (2)
                        3 7.  Secretarial Staff (4)
                                                                                                ;MSWANIWRX

                          LQ U I P@"E  @T
                           Ecluic>,nent available:L,
                               16 Chainel Electronics for Medicine photographic recorder
                           2.  Pre-amolifiers and amplifiers (Efor M)
                                  1. 2 ea. SG:i  (Press,4re).
                                  2. 1 ea. LL2D (Semi_   log)
                                  3. 1 ea. DCA-81 (DC amplifier)                              verter
                                    s ea. Single ended push-Pull single ended tape cOn
                                    (L4 Channel)
                           3.   Consolidated Eler-tronics Tape Transport MechaDism
                                Gilrord densitometer and withdrawal systems.
                  2         S.   Fletach bicycle orgometer
                                        r items are listed.  Necessary SuPPOrt items are &'-S*        available.
                              Only cajo
                            Equipment Pkeaquuirree(d,,'.
                            1.     Pre-amplifiers:
                                   1. 1 ea. SGM
                                   2,  1 ea. a C,@annel tape
                                   3. 1 ea. EEP-8
                                   4. 2  ea.  DC  Amplifiers
                            2.     1ea4 1211 Remote monitor with    stand
                             3.    Quinton; Model 1860 Treadmill    with
                                   prc>p-ramer
                             4.    1 *a@.  Lanocy  Orgoveter
                                   I ea. orgometer Pe2daling assembly
                             S.    I ea. Gas-gas chromatagraph

                         ?AISCELLA@ICOUS:
                         The following additional points are felt to be highly desirable t* this
                           investif                                         %is pmer,am.
                                  .,ator, for the proper accomplishment of t,
                               Soace:
                               WhfLe only 400 additional square feet of spac2e was  requested above 6$
                                  1
                               required, the addition of 600 square feet would allow establishvent
                               of a suitable space for blood and gas analysis and  space  for  electronic
                               equipment and repair shop, both of which are highly desirable in
                               view of the number of subjects projected and the consequent number of
            2                   samples to be analysed; and also in view of the amount  and  frequency  of
                               use of complex electronic instrumentation and supporting gear.
                          2.   Personnel:
                               a.  The services of bic-iredical statistician in the design of this
                               study, the data acquisition and interpreta-,ion is deemed to be a
       2                        vi.rtual necessity. in view of the number of observations to  be  made  on
                               the projected number of subjects.
                               b.  The-full time services of an  electronic technician for eauipment
                               c.aintainance and assistance in data accuisition is considered most
                               desirable and advantageous to the atcomplishrenz of the study.
                 2         3.   EstablishT.%ent of an Advisor
                                                             and Consultat;-on Staff:
                               This program will util-ize moderate to sever-- st-ress in normal  subjects
                               with knvrn circulatory disorders.-  So as to safeguard the rights of
                               the test volunteers and the moral and ethical asdects  of  this  work 2 and
                               a:,So to assist as consultants in the over&U ranagament of this prograr.-,
                               it is recommended that a Senior Advisory Board be established.  The fo',-
                               lowing are saggested as participants:
                               2.
                               3.
                               4.
                               6.
                  4             7.
                               S.
                                                               .17-
                                                                              NMI

                    BUDG@.,T:
                                         ------              imp_wpm=

