                                               14ay 25, 1966
                 Dcar   Dr.
                 Thank you for forwardinr, the two 13.-elininarY CO'3ies of your proposa" to me
                 for review.  I have taken the liberty of distributing copies to many of
                 the interested Dersons fo,: information and comment.  I will Iceep you.in-
                 form2ed of all reactions as I receive the=.  In the meantime, I have com-
                 pleted my revie-vi and would like to take this ol,)po%Lunity to t.iaul,-. you for
                 the effort -ou have ei-.vended in prepa.-4.nS this proposal.
                 In the course of our 16 I-L-y telephone conversation, I revie%.md many of the
                 points I would normally have covered in this letter.  In the interest of
                 brevity I will simply outline them below.
                        1.  The macroelectrode-micra-maaipulator contradiction, a misprint
                            as you explained, however, more information is needed as to desiga,
                            placement, etc.
                        2.  Since the dog skull is--somew2nat variable, what criteria for
                            s'-@-i,-aulating electrode placement will be used?  Will you be using
                            a standard reference current to eliminate variations due to
                            position?  'If you feel it necessary it may be wise to discuss
                            the problem.
                        3.  The problem  posed by possible contraction of the spleen.
                        4.  Organized2 criteria of effect, I.e.,, behavioral, anal-esic,
                            anesthetic, etc.
                        S.  Use of descri?tors  and  measurements  of  waveform,  i.e.,  rise  time,
                            1)eal"- duraticni, decty tim, etc.
                   Re"ardinS those problems the riost severe test x,,-ill be to orr,,aai.ze@Suitable
                   Sca2l@c for judgin- the ef'Lect of electrical stimulation.  This sociion in
                   particular needs e-.Kpansion and refinemcnl.  Do not hesitate to use references
                   to establisii nreccdcut. It seems to mc that  some  care  will  have  to  be  ex-
                   ercised in th@ or-anieation o@' thcse criteria Lo prevent t,ic  final  stL-x,.ary
                   from dooencratLn;,- into an mecdotal su=iai-y of a series  oj'@  case  histories.

                                                          .2-
                   Since thd mode of ainplication of current through the electrddes effects the
                   state of the animal, I  wonder  if  you  intend  to  standardize  the  procedure
                   of turniua-on the current.  What will determire the maxim= currenl". strength
                   to be used? W'tiat  considerations  will  determine  how  fast2  you  will  approach
                   this maximum? If you proceed tlirough a  ranae  of  intensities,  to  a  fl-ted
                   maximum, will you be  prepared  to  record  transient  chan"es  which  miy  occur?
                     I understand your situation, it uill tal,.c  tv?o  months  to  §et  the  pporram
                   underway. Once startetl yo-i plan to use 5()C) clof,,--, in the co%-rac of the mmt
                   tan months.  I believe you also plan Lo re-u!,,! t'4tL-se eML-2--ilo %,,@hcnc-.,cr
                   possible. within the constraintu L-npost!t! i,y t.i(.
                                            Consequent',-Y, I lt3-:o ticx2x.
                   of prior manipulation.                                                       be
                       to complete your study as outlined in tli(-- ilrrt. ycai-,             tecti
                   able
                   joined by others in wondering about the details of your ;,rOLOCOI-.
                                                                               2         h   aoi
                   these questions may be   answored beat by further discussion in     t a b y of
                   the proposal.
                                                                                uld like to address
                   T. have finished with my specific co=bp-ntsi however, 'I wo
                   a few words to the general problem of getting elcctronarcosis research
                   2sponsored.  Because of ths-recent history of this field of endeavor,
                   spotty-ness of performance and redundancy of the work  LL will be difficult,
                                                                     this subject area will have to
                   at best,to sell.  Consequcrtly, proposals in
                                              tod and realistic in    SCOPE to receive support.  As
                   be complet2e, well dOCUMen
                                                                             the telephone, I
                   'I told you last Or-toocr            @and reiterated on
                   @believe this study is both needed   and wanted.    But to receive any but
                      sory attention it wlll have to    deal  with   well-orgunlzed,   hard-headed
                   cur
                   research.  Even then, it w2ould be    foolish to promise support of any kind
                   in advance.
                   With this in min4, I would    like to ask you to &alm this proposal as a
                   starting point, detail out    your research plan, and place it within a docu-
                   mented frame%iork.
                                      if you have any need to call me please feel free      to do so.
                   In  the   meantime,             2     t Area Code                          and
                   I  may  be  reached during the day a
                                                                           equire.
                   will  be  happy  to give you =y assistance you =7 r
                   RcgardLnp,, your question-an institutional overheads 1, can scarcely be
                   considered an autliority in this arna.  Howevers, in-'Ofar as I can 2dete=inel,
                                                                  e any effect on the acceptability
                   this figure is negotiable and viLlI not hav
                   of  the   proposal.
                   once again, I wish to thanil, you for your effort in preparing this proposal.
                   I am lool-,Ln- forward to a continuation of our commmication.
                                 7                              Sincerely.
                                                                                                   . .....................

