                          AN EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF
                         THE ELECTRIC FISH SENSORY AND D-ARL"A
                         PROCESSING SYSTEMS DESIGNED TOWARD
                          DEVELOPING PHYWOICAL ANALOGS FOR
                            @Li,4iRDI@"ARE PROT OTYPES H.A-V-iNG
                                 SIMILAR CAPABILITIES
                   0                  2 Octobe.- 1973

                   Experiments Needed to Assess Sensitivity, Range and Effective-
                   ness of the Electric Fislies to Detect Objects and Communicate-
                   Underwater
                   We consider it necessary to perform a number of experiments de-
            signed to quantify some of the electric fish properties. Four different
            species of el ectr-Lc f-'.sl.ics have been considered for these experiments be-
           2 cause of their basically different @;ysteni:@ used as transmitters and electro-
            receptors. These fishes are:
                   a.  Gymnarchus niloticus
                                                               'th
                      -AnAfricanweaklyfresh-waterelectricfish.-wi  amedium.--
            fixed frequency(260 to 300 Hz) d a           efor'm.'' Frequency
                                       an   compos2ite wav
            does not change .vith ter--L-1@n-&-ature. It has about seven kinds -of electro-
            receptors plus displacement,, acoustic and chemical sensors located on
            or near'the skin. Electroreceptors are located on the whole body but are.
            more numerous near and on the head and near its  roi.,ited W1.
            Countries or origin Sudan, Nigeria and Ivory Coast and the two Congos2
            of Africa. It can grow to a maximum size of 5 feet and has'a life span of
            about 40 years.
                      The electric organ is located caudally occupying about 1/2
            to 2/3 of the fish le ngth. Electric organ is derived from modified
            muscle spindels. Difficult to obtain and to keep alive. Has strange
            parasitic diseases affecting the spinal cord. The fish is blind and has
            only vestigial eyes.
                   3b.  Sternarchus albifrons
                      A South-American weakly fresh-water electric fish with a
            high, relatively fixed frequency (700-800 kHz) and a composite Nvaveform.
            The rate of dischar-e is temperature dependent at a rate of between 40

                   to 60 Hz er de,,r
                            p      ree centigrade.  Has at least three kinds of electro-
                  receptors plus displacement, acoustic and chemical sensors located on
                  or near the skin.  Electroreceptors are located on the whole body and.
                  preferentially on or around the head.  Counties of origin: Brazil.,
                  Columbia., Venezuela, Guyanas, Argentina.. Bolivia, Ecuador, Peru
              2    in South-America and some parts of Central Amer- ca.  Can grow to a
                  maximum size of one foot.  Life span is at least 10 years.
                              The electric organ is located candally occupying about 2/3
                  of the fishs' body length.  The electric organ is derived from modified
                                  -It is a hardy species, easy to maintain and easy to
                  nervous tissue.
                 procure.  This fish is also bli2nd and has vestigial eyes.
                         c.  Gymno,'.us carapo
                             A South-American weakly fresh water electric fish with a
                 mediurii   low variable frequency (30 to 150 Hz) and a composite wave-
                 form.  Has multi     electro and sensory receptors located on or near
                 the skin.  Electroreceptors are located on the whole body and preferenti-
                 ally on or near the head.  Counti2es of origin same as for Sternarchus
                 albifrons.  Can grow to a maximum size of one and a half feet. Life
                 span is several years.
                            The electric organ is located caudally occupying about 1/2
                 of the fishs I body length.  The electric organ is derived from modified
                muscle spindels. It is a hardy species but is not as easy to procure as
                Sternarchus.
                        d.  Gna5thonemus petersii
                            An- African weakly fresh-Nvater electric fish with a low variable
                pulse-form repetition rate signal (5 to 170 pps).  Has multiple ampullary
                and tuberous electroreceptors and sensory receptors located on the body
                                                2

                and preferentially on or near the head. Counties  of  origin  located  in  the
                subtropical, tropical and equatorial Africa.  Can grow to a maximum size
                of one foot.  Life span may be several years.
                             The electric organ is located in the tail and is derivedfrom
                modified muscle tissue.  (It is relatively easy to procure, but is very
                difficult to maintain it alive for loncrer periods of time2 in captivity.)
                        For all experiments we will use a fibero'lass water tank of 12 R
                diameter and 4 ft height.
                        Experiment #1 (B)
                        This experiment is designed to establish the ability  of  an  electric
                fish of tl-.o species mentioned under (a) and (b) to detect metallic  or  non-
                metallic objects having different masses and  introduced  in  the 2 water  tank
                at different distances from the fish. The fish will be held in  a  position  A
                by a vertical nylon net.  The nylon-net will be raised and the object intro-
                duced at position B. The time until the fish will detect the  object  will  be
                noted by observina the fish which may retract  or  advance  in  the  direction
                of the 61.)j ect, depending on the _composition and mass of the object and  on
           2     the species of the fish. This experiment will be  repeated  after  lining  the
                interior of the tank with aluminum foil (see Fig. 1).  The objects con-
                sidered are: iron, stainless steel (non-magnetic)., wood, plexiglass,
                each in different dimensions (like 10 cm x 2 cm; 5 cm x 1 cm; 2 cm x
                0. 5 cm; etc).  The objects will be fixed to a nylon thread and introduced
                vertically into the tank.
  0                      Experiment #2 (B)
                        This experiment is designed to assess the capability of,electric
                fishes to use their naviaation system to avoid obstacles like fine nylon
                                                  3

                                                    Electric Fish Position "All
                                                    Nylon Net
                                                    (Can be moved vertically)
                                                                    Water Tank
                                                                12 ft 6 and 4 ft high
                                                                made of f-:berglass
         2                                                      Object to be I.-itroduced
                                                               Position "B"
                           Fig. 1.  The reaction time of the fish will be plotted
                                    against different masses of the same material
                                    type of object and for the same mass of dif -
                                    ferent kind of object materials. A short film
7                                    may be made to illustrate the reaction of the
                                    fish.
                                                    4

                  thread or fine wire (aluminum@, copper cannot be used because copper
                  even in minute quantities will kill these fishes. Again we will  use  fishes
                  of the species mentioned under (a) and  (b).  Gymnarchus  niloticus  is  an
                  air breather and cannot be confined in a tube but it can be used in experi-
                  ments with free swimming fishes.  It is also a small goldfish eater.  This
                  fish w2ill be put in the tank at the point "All (see Fig. 2) behind a nylon net.
                  A double net will divide the tank.  A goldfish will be put in a nylon net bag
                  and introduced in the tank at point "B" after the nylon net holding the
                  electric fish has been removed.  The reaction of the fish and the avoidance
                  of the net will be observed and filmed. The fish species  type  (b)  Stern-
                  archus albifrons is2 not a fish eater but usually reacts with an escape to  a
                  metallic object. In this case a metallic object will be used to  force  the
                  fish to cross the double net.  Its avoidance of the obstacles will be noted
                  and filmed.  Both fishes are bl.ind.
                         The experirrent will be repeated usincr  a  grounded  aluminum  foil
                  along the inner wall of the water tank.
                         Experiment Tlr3 (B)
                         This experiment is designed to demonstrate the  ability  of  electric
                  fish to detect a magnetostatic field.  The arrangement will be similar with
                  experiment fl but instead of using an object in the water we will use a
                  permanent magnet outside the tank. Magnets of 10  kG,  1  kG,  and  500  G,
                  will be used at distances of 3 ft from the tank wall or near the tank0  wall
                  at Position "B" or IC''. The fish will be located at position  "All  behind
                  a nylon net (see Fig. 3). The magnetic field in the tank  will  be  measured
                  with a Hall-effect-probe and a Gaussmeter. The  reaction  of  the  fish  to
                  the maanetic field will be noted and filmed. The threshold of  detection  of
                                                   5

                                                          Electric Fish
                                                          Position "All
                                                             Nylon Net (Can be removed)
          Eventual direction of
          fish movina toward the                                        Water Tank
                    t@,                                                  erclass 12ft  x 4 ft
          prey at "B2l'
                                                                         Nylon Nets
                                                                       Nylon Ba. LT
                                                           Gold Fish
                                                           Position "B"
                                                         Position of Wire Nets
                                               Figure 2.
            0                                      6

                the magnetic field by different fishes of the same species and of the
                average of different species will be plotted one a-ainst each other.  The
                magnet will be also moved from I'D" to "El' and the reaction of the fish
                observed.
                                                    lectric Fish Position "Ati
                                                           Nylon Ne+.
                                      2                            Fiberglass Water T@Lnk
                                                                  12 ft x 4 ft high
               Direction of
              Movement
                               PO;                         Permanent Magnet
                               Position "C'
                                             Figure 3.
                        The sensitivity of electroreceptors will be calculated, counting
              4   the number of electroreceptors per square cm and plotting it against the
                 minimum magnetic field gradient that could be detected by the fish.
                                                 7

                      Experiment #4 (B)
                      This experiment is designed to demonstrate the ability of electric
               fishes to detect electrostatic fields.  The arrancement for this experiment
               will be similar to the preceding experiment, #3, but instead of a permanent
               magnet we will use a sphere charged electrostatically to 100, 200t 400t  '
               and 1000 ESU a2nd isolated on a teflon and plexiglass support.  The gradient
               of the field generated by the charged sphere in the tank will be calculated.
               The threshold of reaction of the electric fishes (different fishes of the same
               species and different species) will be established (see Fig. 4).
                                                   Electric Fish Position "All
                                                           Nylon 14et
            2                                                    Fiberglass Water Tank
                                                                 12 ft @ x 4 ft hiah
                     "D"o                                    0
             Direction Of
             Movement
                                                             tro statically
                              Position                  Charaed Sphere
                                                             t>
4
                              Position 'IC"
                                             Figure 4.
                                                  8

                        The threshold of detection of the electrostatic field (stationary or
                    ving) of different fishes of the same species aa inst each other and the
                   MO                                              a
                   average of different species against each other will be plotted.  The sen-
                   sitivity of the electroreceptors will be calculated, counting the number of
                   .electroreceptors per square cm2 and plotting it against the minimum electro-
                   static field aradient that could be detected by the fish.
                         Experiment #5 (B)
                         This experiment is designed to assess the ability of electric fish
                   to detect DC, AC repetitive signals, square wave and transient signals.
                   The fish will be positioned behind a nylon net in the tank.  Carbon elect-
                   rodes will be put in th2e tank at the opposite end of the tank at one feet
                   apart (see Fig. 5).  The four experiments to be performed are as follows:
                         a.  DC signals will be applied with a telegraph key monitored by
                   an oscilloscope and attenuated by p@tentimeter and furnished by DC bat-
                   teries. A resistance in series will limit the current (see Fig. 6).  The
                   reaction and threshold detection of the electric fis2h of the applied current/
                   and voltage will be noted.  The gradient of the current will be calculated
                   and a measurement of the voltacre at the position where the fish will be put
                   -will be made prior to putting the fish in the tank with two carbon electrodes
                   one foot apart.  The threshold detection of the different fishes of the same
                   species will be plotted one against another and the average of differe
         2          species will be plotted also each against another.
                          b.  The same procedure will be used to find the threshold of de-
                   tection of AC sinusoidal current for frequencies of 5, 10, 20, 50, 1002 200.,
                   5002 1000@ 20002 5000, and 10, 000 Hz (see Fig. 7).  The signals will be ap-
                   plied with nonpolarizable Aa, Aacl electrodes and1 measured with the same
                   kind of electrodes.  Also frequencies close to the fishes own frequency will
                   be used.
                                                    9

                    c.  Square waves of same repetition rate as the sinusoidal currents
             will be used and applied with Ag, AgCl electrodes.
                    d.  The transients will be applied with the help of a network using
             a pulse transformer., resistors and a charged capacitor (see Fig. 8). The
             values NNill be calculated and the resulting waveforms will be measured
             with an oscilloscope. These signals will be applied a2lso with Ag, AgCl
             electrodes.
                        The reaction and threshold of detection of the signals will be
             noted and plotted the same way as for DC current.
               Fiberglass Water     Electrodes for measurement
               Tank                 of applied current attenuated  Fish
                2 ft x 4 ft high    by the water in the tank
                                         NylonNe
                                 1 ft
                        4    12 ft                          12 ft
                                 1  f
                                      Electrodes for
                                    Applying Different Currents
                                      and Signals
                                           Figure 5.
                                               10

        Shie Id
                                                       Shielded Cable
                                    p 2
                                                          Carbon Electrodes
                                                          1 ft apart 1 cm free ends
                                                             Oscilloscope
                            R
                  '7
                        B     Battery (optimum v2oltage will be determined by experi-
                              ments but tentatively set between 2 and 6 volts)
              pll P23' P3     Potentiometers calculated to have constant impedance
                              together with RI = resistor to correspond to the im@-
                              pedance of the carbon electrodes in water measured
                              with the AC liquid impedance bridge
                 C and R2  =  capacitor and resistor to4 suppress sparks when the
                              key is manipulated
                        k =   key (telegraph type)
                                Fig. 6. DC signal system.

                                                          Transmitting Electrodes
                                                              in the Water                 Receiving Electrodes
                                                                                           in the Water
                     Viaveform    Impedance                    Ag, AgCl                    Ag$ AgCl
                      Generator    Adapter
                                  0         Oscilloscope                           Oscilloscope
                                   Fig. 7. Set-up for sinusoidal AC and square waves.

    - --------- --
                                   Shield
 To battery
 for char,,:-,inc,        R
                                 j Shielded Cable
 the capacitor
                  --c
                          T           Ag, AgCl Electrode.
                                       in IVater
            JC
                 c3
                                        Oscilloscope
             c   High capacity tantalitic capacitor (val2ue to be experi-
                 mentally established according to the im-edance of the
                 electrodes in the water)
       CR,;CR  = Spark suppressing networks
        2   3 4
          RJY R2 =Varial,,!,-@ resistors to adapt the circuit to the Ag-AgCl
                 electro@u'es in the water
             i = Jack for peak current measurement (with a resistor
                 in series and an oscilloscope in parallel)
             T0   Pulse transformer
               Fig. 8. Transient generating set-up.
                         13

                         Experiments #I(P), 3(P), 4(p), and 5(P)
                         These experiments will be similar to the experiments l(B),, 3(B)'4(B) z
                  5B but instead of using free swimming fishes we will use fishes of species
                  mentioned in 'IC" and ID" on page 2 like Gymnotus carapo and Gnothonemus
                  petersii or equivalents restrained in a plexiglass 2tube with holes and two
                  c4,@inless steel electrodes at the end (see Fig. 9).  Instead of observing the
                  reac@L.'ion of the electric fish to the different stimuli. we will monitor on the
                  oscilloscope and frequency counter the charging rate amplitude and wave-
                  form of the fish response to the stimuli.  The latency and habituation win
                  be noted.  This time the graphs will show2 the relation between stimulus and
                  response and also the threshold of reaction.  With this species of fish and
                  system a better quantification is possible of the ability of fish to detect ob-
                  jects, magnetic fields., electrostatic fields, DC currents, AC repetitive
                  sinusoidal or squarewave signals and transient signals.
                                                                             Plexiglass tube
                       2                                                      with fish in it
                                                                             and electrodes
                                                                             at the end
                                                                                  Fiberglass
                                                                                 Water Tank
                                                                             2       x 4 ft high
                           Amplifier
            'Oscilloscope
                    Frequency                                          odes for Experiment T:va- P,
                     Center      Object to be
                                 detected,
                                 E.%-perinient f l(p)              Perminent mn-,--,net,
                  Electrostatically cliarf-ed sphere,             Experiment 76,--'3(P)
                  Experiment # 4(P)
                                              Figure 9.
                                                 14

                      Experiment #6
                      This experiment is designed to relate the ability of electric fishes
              to communicate underwater and the distance at which they can manage it
              (see Fig. 10).  The natural noise and the signal strength of the fish will
              be measured.  The original signal will be recorded with electrodes on a
              magnetic tape recorder and monitored on an oscilloscope.  This signal
              wil2l be played back with the aid of two carbon electrodes in the tank at a
              place 'If 11 at the distance 11111 from the fish situated at the point llg" and
              confined there with a nylon net.  The reaction of the fish to its own signal
              will be observed and eventually filmed.  The signal will be subsequently
              attenuated to precalculated attenuations corresponding to distances of 100 ftp
              500 2fti 1000 ft and 5000 ft. Jf the -.@i-sh will not react to a certain attenuation
              a variable attenuation in between the fixed points will be used to assess the
              distance at which the fish can detect its own signal. Also later noise will
              be introduced in the form of white noise and its effect on the ability of the
              fish to detect its own signal will be observed. At the end graphs will be
              pl2otted for the signal to noise ratio versus distance of signal detection.
                     The field generated by the electric fish will be calculated and
              plotted on a graph.
                     The experiments #IB, 2B. and 3B will be made in the fiberglass tank
              as it is and with aluminum foil set around the inner wall of the tank and
              grounded.  The results with or without the grounded aluminum-foil will
              be plotted on graphs an8d eventually graphs will be plotted for the differ-
              ences in results with and without grounded aluminum foil.
                                               15

                                                          Receivincr Electrodes
                                                                  0
                                                          Ag, AgCl
                                                          Nylon Net
         Oscilloscope Amplifier
                                                                Fiberziass Water Tank
                                                                12 ft  x 4 ft 2high
                                                      Transmittine, Electrodes
                                                      Ag, AgCl
                  Oscilloscope      impedance      Amplifier    nl Tape Recorder
                                    Network            Electric Fish Position G
                                                          Nylon Net
                                                                Fiberglass Water Tank
                        1                                        12 ft x 4 ft high
                                                         Transmitting Electrodes
                                                         Ag2 AgCl, Position E.
                   Oscilloscope      Impedance     Amplifier  FY, Tape Recorder
                                       Network
                                          Fic,,ure 10.
                                               16

               Experiment #7
               In this experiment the electromagnetic field around some electric
         fishes (the ones which can be confined in a tube) will be measured and
         compared with values resulting from the calculated field.
                                   0 ol               Electric Fish
                                                    g, AgCl Electrodes
                          0
                                          9            Electrodes Ag, AaCl
                                                      Moved in the Direction
   Oscilloscope Amplifier                             to the Center
                                    '@7  lamplifier
                                         Oscilloscope
                                 Figure 11.
                                    17

