              Office Mei7iora UIIO                              UNITED STATES G&EI?NM
                                                                                                          EN
              Ir 0    1     Cliiefp Technical Branr--h                              DATE:     13 November 1953
              FROM
              9U.Djr-CT:    Conference wi
                       2                                                     -@@n bi      self an
                                 T
                                               office in t
                                                     Was hington    D.C.   Tii   6li -ov-cnber 1 53.
                                                         gave    the    impression of   'tring -Lhe be@3t
                            iniorm2ewa,w,ras@well as   expressing the.  fii!7liL-st decree of cooperation,
                            of the five..euthoritles whom I ligve contdcted in behalf of
                            ARTICHOKE.
                                 3.  "Truth Sei-ums"       He   quoted   historical   sources   not
                                          general],-,r known, that described the obtm:ining of
                                          reliable  and   most   important   information   from   a
                                        --Zivil   War   taptured   Confederate   Officer    through
                                          interrogation under chloroform anestliesia.
                                          Ilecent narcobmalysis    of certain    unwilline     sub-
                                          jects hed succeeded ttirougli this ruse:  -an
                                          ,exhaustivt-   physical   examination,   inc-lvding   the
                                          takina of blood for     tests, finally assuring the
                                          subject that he showed evidence of an incipient
                                          fatal disease that     could  be  everted  only   by   an
                                                      ediate-2intravenouiinjection.
                                      lischeintc@dtif                          mmented that
                                          pistols so Ta=ed-Hiid-le@e-n in German manu-.
                                          facture for it= y years.  Chemicals otlier than
                                          teargas would in all probability have been
                            8                                  t d
                                          used.  11                          tact'
                                                             kowner/manaeer of     a re-
                                                   s c a &;4.0&Ld  velo    nt lab   at

                                Electric Fields   Witil tlle PoLential of radar waves
                                  Or electrOin4gnetic fields, to effect'cbnfusion or
                                  Bleop, lie was unfamiliar.
                                                                                     (. titam I r

