                                                                                                  Y.IZ
                                                                                  24  April  1952
                      Speci&L Research for  Artichoke
                          1.  On Wed              @pril 1952, the writer had an extended      con@.
                      versation with                                  smoba c2onsultant to     this
                      Agency arit it ranking officer of the TSS organization.
                      expressed great interest in the Artichoke  problem  and  closely  related
                      matters and stated to the writer that he personally would offer as-
                      istance both in research ar,4 in money to                ta along these
                      lines that the writer might suggest                        2 stated  that  he
                      did not wish official c(m,u unications in  hose m      r
                                                                                 since  he   stated
                      they were too slow, but suggested, with the approval of
                      that he be given  a  brief.,  informal  memorandum  covering  projects  which
                      we 'felt were of  material  interest  to  the  Artichoke  project  and  which
                2      could be done by research within. TSS  cor b  c n             -arminc    out"
                 of   to capable researchers or institutions.                            ted  that
                      he falt.that the Artichoke work was of extreme  importance  and  no  time
                      should be lost in getting Artichoke P'esearch under way.  Ile  stated  he
                      would do everything in his power to  expedite  and  carry  out  necessary
                      research.
                          2.  In view                          statements, on lhursd       24 April
                      1    li@e writer discussed the situation with                              nd
                                    suggested that  the  writer  draw  up  a  list  of  suggestions
                      related to Artich k             in th     ar fu                   2                  all
                                                      and                    a        writer  could
                      8    thes e suggestions and determine which of them were suitable         for
                      research or for development otherwise.
                          3.  Set  forth-on  the  following  pages  are  a  series  of  suggestions
                      which are related to  the  Artichoke  program  2and  which  ihe  writer  feels
                      are  worthy  of  exploration.  Some  of  the  suggestions  are  controversial
                      and, in the opinion of the writer.. they could be presented to out-
                      standing authorities in the fields to be considered and it could be
                      ascertained from  these  authorities  whether  or  not  fu3-l-scale  research
                   would be warranted.
        9                 4. For  matter  of  record  and  to  explain  such  subjects  13  electro-
                      shock and lobotomy  appearing  in  the  attached  list  these  subjects  were
                      introduced into the conversation by

                                                    AI)CII BELATIvr,. ARTICIIOKR.
                $UorESTED FIELD',-, FDR_ SPERIAL Rr--l-
                  CH,F           ding Drugs
                     MIC LS (-Inclu
                                         that specific research should be
                        it 2is be3.ioTed
                     undertaken to d4ovelop now chemicals or  drugs  or  to  :im-
                     prove known  elment3  for  use  in  the  Artichoke  work.  A
                                                          hat  drugs   are   best
                     study should-be nade to determine w
                     mdted for direct USS on subjects along the lines Of
                     2anytal and pentothal  and  wliico  drugs  are  best.for  in-
                                                            cts.   This    second
                      ect orlong-rangs approach to subje
                     d!Lr
                     -ype of-drug  should  be  one  that  could  be  administered
                     t                                  el, posibly beii-g
                     over a considerable period of 2tim
                                              and  would  either  have  an   agi-
                     placed in food or water
                                                                   Ss,,   tension
                     tating  effect  (producing  anxistyj,.nervousne alinp, of
                     etc.) or a depressinf, effect  (creating  a  fe
                     despondency, hopeleasnesso lothargyp etc.).  This study
              2                              la  'r  drugs  that  can  effectively
                     should include chomica    0
                     be concealed in common  items  such  as  foods  waters  coca
                                                                         of drug
                     cola, beer,, 3.iquort cigarettes., etc.  This type
                     should olso be cal)at-le of use in standard medical treat-
                    2 9&-nts such as vaccinations7 stiotst etc.
                         While there are literally hundreds of chemicals or
                     drugs that effect the mental. pro)cesses of an individual#
                     xmny of these chemicals or drugs could be eliminated by
                     individuals  having  special  knowledge  in  the   chemical/
                     drug field.  It is known 2that the Amy Chemical Warfare
                     Service has  made  exhaustive  stlidies  along  these  lines
                     and  perhaps  they  could  furnish  us  with  maqy  specific
                     answers. - t-1--in li.ke                              III,,,$"
                              coii.d, undoubtedl-y. r                           ion
                                                     .,,ivf-- pert2inenr. inlormeit,
                     if they could be-properly appi-oachad.
                         AF-.ROS,@',IZ, r:TC.
                           It'is felt that an exhaustive study.should be made
                      of various gases and aerosols that would be effective in
                      Artichoke work.  Also a study should be made of the of-
      2                fecto of oxygen  (or  other  simil-ir  type)  deficiencies.
                      in this cormection, gas guns  jets or sprays, b    oth con-
                      cealed  or  open,  should  be  studied.  In  addition,  the
                      problem of possible permanent brain injury and amnesias
                      following lack  of  oxygen  or  exposure  to  oth--r  gns6i
                      should be examined.  (See related5 problems below.)
                                       7

     :I.   14IGti AIID LCW MES-2uRES
                    Ihe effects of  high  and  low pressures on   individuals
                should be examined an  a  possible basis  for  Artichoke  work.
    IV.     SOUND
                    'Tbe writer lm boon unable   to obtain  any worth-
                while information on studies in  this field th,-tt would
                apply specificall2y to the  Artichoke  problem.  ltowever..
                it is felt that a considerable amount of research could
                profitably be evpended in the field of sound.  This    re-
                search should include the effect on human beings of
                various type of vibratlons,  monotonous  sounds.,  concussion,
                ultra-high frequency,, ultra-sonic3, the  effect  of  con-
                stantly ropeati-!d words,2, sounds, continuous suggpotion.,
                non-rhythmic sounds,, whispering, etc.
    V.      FACTERI.@  PLA?,'T CULTUItErp FUNGI, POIQONS OF VARIOUS TYPES, ETC.
                     This field may  conceivably t-e valua?(-le in that
                these media are capal,le of prodlciyie lllnesues w@,,ich in
                turn would produce hig2h feverat delirium,  etc,6  It  is  also
                well ktown that species of  the  nishroon  produce  a  certain
                type of intoxication  and  mental  deranFPement.  While  this
                      of subjects is closely  rolated  to  I  above  (DRUGS),
                group
                it is conceivable that they  could  handled  as  a  different
                type of rose.-web.                 /be
     VI.    DjrT2, DIETAPY Drricir.7!clr,!,,
                     This important  subject   has not  been  properly  ex-
                plored fron. the point of vi--w of the Artichoke work.
                The removal of certain basic   food elements such as
                sugar, starch,, calcluin,, vitarins, proteins,, etc.  from
                the food of an individual over a certain period of time
                will prodt1,@a psychological and physical ".#ctions in    an
                individual.  A  study'should  be  made  to  determine  whether
                or not the removal of certain food elements from the
                diet of prisoners over a given period af time wil@
                materially  condition  them  for  Artichoke  work.  lmghly

----------------
                      -s,n-iced-food and extremely salty foods  are  constantly
                      reported in intelligence  reports  in  connection   with
                      interrogation.  rihile it is probable that this is solely
                      to produce thirst,, research may sh.ow that  It  has  other
                      effects.
 2                          In t@ds connection  it  is   conceivatly   possible
                      that if  certain  dietary  deficiencies  produce  advan-
                      tageous results from an Artichoke point of view..
                      "cial.1y'canned  foods  having  elenents  ro-moved  could
                      be m#mlf actured or prepared f or  individuals  held  In
                      custod2y.
          VII.    ELr-CTRO'.;HOCK
                           This subject,ha-9 been  discusapd  at   considerable
                      lenqth and still is.,considered  a  enntrova-raial  matter.
                      Whether or not its use as  a  positive  weapon  for  gaining
                      information from or control  of  an  individual  or  whether
                      it is another third-degree m2ethod does not seem clearly.
                      established  to  the  writer.  The  foreign  intelligence                       pp@
                      reports seen to reflect  that  slectroahocki  when  used  by
                      the Soviets or their satellites,,  is  primarily  a  third-
                      degree method. We have been  unable  to  find  any  irxiica-
                      tion3 that electr2oshock has  been  used  to  gain  informa-
                      tion from or control of an individual direct
                                                                     ly
                           The writer has been  unable  to  find  anywhere  that
                      the electroshock coma has boon used  as  a  means  of  ob-
                      taining hypnotic control of an individual.
                           Whether an individual  wil]L  revnil  2information  &3
                      a result of elootroshock,  or  while  in  an  olectroshock
                      coma has not as yet  been  demonstrated  to  the  writer
                         'the writer
                      and              to date,,-has.found  no  literature  in
                      this connection.
                           The low-powered electro3liock foixnd on the  ccxm  on
                      slectrashock machine is a third-degree method apparently.
                           Whether  alectroshook  can  produce  controlled  am-
                      nesias.do--s not appear to te astablishe,,l except  In  the
                      time ftrea -imediately surrounding the alectroshock treat-
                      ment and, althotigh it is possibl6e thstt sevs--re or  au3-
                      tained electroshock may produce a veeetable, it is
                      doubted if the kgency will support this activity.
                           The writer can  find  no  Information  of  electroshock
                      treatments being applied to normal individuals for
                      purely experimental purposes.

                              This finld  should be examined by the     .49dical  ';taff.
            Vill.                        rLcC,"LRO-'O'TF'F.P II-MUCING MNCIII'IES
                              This field  should be thorouehly explored.  The
                        Ldqa  of obtilnltie a sleen or ale,,zplilke corma or -i n@-ir-
                        cosis  by  electronics  would  appear  to  have  a  Kreat  deal
                        of merit from An Artichoke point of vie-4. The  writer
                        has  been  told  that  there  afe   electronic   3leep-inducing
                        machines that  are  of  the  non  shock,  non-pa.inf'ul  variety.
                        One of  th--se  was  reported  t2o be  in  U39  at  the  University
                        of RictL-mond            Pichmnl,,  'iirginia.   Datails.,   how-
                        ev--r. are lacking.  Whether    or  not  the  machine  is  dan-
                        eerou-3 to unknown, b,.lt if an alsetronictlly indiicod
                        sleep could be'obtiin--d and    that2 3loeii  used  as  a  moans
                        for    enining    hypnotiocontrol of an indiridual, this
                        apparatus might be of extreme value to the Artichoke
                        work.
            JX.     lDriOTDt',IY, I:RAII.@l SURGENY
                              The writ-ir is  of  the  opinion  that  the  Avency,  under
                2        no  circumstmees,  would  consider  this  type  of   thing   as
                        an operative  measure.  Ilowever,,  it  is  felt  that  the  sub-
                        joct@  could  be  examined  by  the  Medical-Staff  to  ascertain
                        whatev--r valti-3-it may htve and whether or not the Soviets
                        could be using this technique as a w      anon.
                                  2                               c
                                a medical consultnnt of the Agency In       tho   field
                        of psychi,-ttry,, might be valuable in this connection.
                                        certainly would.know                 who  is  re-
                        -arded  as an atithority in this field and who      resides   in
                        Washington.,  D.C.)  2This  field  should  be  --xamined  by  the
                        Medical f7)taff.
            X.      LIGIIT,,           El'T'r.CTor cju)rz, ETC.
                              The  effects  of  glaring  littits  upon  an  individual
                        are well known  and  have  been  a  staml;trd  p,)Iice  procedure
                        for years.  Py the same    token,  the  use  of 3 white   walls
                        in connection with glaring lights appears to be another
                        standard technique. While these and related  techniques
                        should be studied, the writer is of the opinion t@at

                            rose-arch should be conducted to determine the
                    effect of long and continuous exposure of individuals
                    to infra-red and ultra-violet light.  Some work might
                    possibly be done involving  opaque walls or waus upon
                    which shadow "vies could be projected.  Also the of-
                    fact-of-colora upon individuals might be worthy of re-
      2              search an a conditioning mechanism.
         11.    PSTCHOLOGICAL PP.ORLEIC
                         There are a great many psychological techniques
                    that could be used In conn&8tion with the Artichokq
                    work.  Many of these tochniquns are vmll known and havvg
                                           P
                    been used by clinical 2 9:,-choloeists., psychiatrists
                    and interrogators for.:,it long time.  It vnight be found
                    that certain of these techniques.,  particularly, if ap-
                     lied In reverse., would be highly advantageou.-; to atic-
                    P
                    c6ssful Artichoke operations.  Among the psychological
                    problems that might be consi&r2ed for study would bet
                             A.  Moving or vibrating room.
                             B.  Distorted nooms.
                             C.  The deliberate creation of an anviety
                                   condition.
                             D.  The creation of panic# fear, or     e
                                   exploitation of established phobias,,
                                   etc.
                             Es  Th2e effect of heat  and cold.
                             F.  The effect of dampnessp drynes-.q or
                                   saturated or dry  air.
                             G.  The general problem'of disorientation.
                             H.  Completely soundproof areas*
          XII.     ELECTRONICS  G@"NERAL
                          I%ere are mrny electronic devices of vrriou.,q types
                   8  that may be important from an Artichoke point of view.
                     For example -- can the electro-encephalograph be used as
                     a device for detecting certain types of treatment that
                     individuals have been subjected to?  Does an alectro-
                     encephalograph reflect slootroshock treatments or head

                      injury or drugging?    Does an electro-encephalograph re-
                      flect whether or not   an  individual  is   under   hypnosis?
                      Can  an  electro-encephalograph  be  used   to   affirmatively
                      establish whether an amnesia has been produced?
          IM,  HrPO-SPRAr
                             rt would be a great advantaze if a small, effective
                      2hypo-spray device could be designed alone the lines of a
                      fountain  pen.  This,  of  course,  would   necessarily   have
                      to include  some  effective  chemicitl  or  drug  that  could
                      be  used  in  this  connection  ;tith  the  hypo'sprny.  This
                      would be a very valuable weapon.
           XIV.    SCIIEINMT PISIOL
                             Set out immediately 2 below  is  an  excerpt  from  the
                                                                    S"
                      publication  entitled  "LUCIAN  CARY  ON   OUN   .   (Fawcett
                      Book  110),  article  entitled  "Gadget  Guns  Mean   Murder"'
                      page 122:
                                "Guns shooting tear gas were    made in this
                             country t.,etween the two  world  wars  and  many
 2                            police departments bought them.     One type was
                             ttardly intenoed for police use   since  it   was
                             no big
                                   Fer than a fountain pen and was made to
                             look like one.  Daring World War 1I the Ger-
                             mana made  what  they  called   "acheintot"   pistols.
                             The German word lit2erally means "appearance of
                             death".  The appearance-of-death pistol.9 used
                             a ras that renders a marf uncon3c:lous as  quaiLckKILy
                             as holding_an ether cone over his nose."
                             This device should be run down.      The   writer would
                       like  to know  the  effective  range  of  this  weapon,   the
   5                    type  of gas used  and  how  long  the  coma  condition lasts.
                             The writer knows that Lucian Cary is a well-known
                       authority  on  guns  and  has  written  extensively  on  such
                       weaponso

