                           QUARTERLY TECTINICAL PROGRESS REPORT
                                  I November 1970 - 31 January 1971
            Technical progress in this period was as follows:
                  1) Acquisition and review of applicable reports and data,
                  Z) Prcliz-i-iinary organization of a systematic approach to the problem
                     of personnel incapacitation  and
                  3) Two2 ad hoc evaluations of proposed incapacitation systems.
            1.  Thirty-eight unclassified and twe:ity-five classified documents are now
            on hand, covering a wide range of electrical, chemical, sensory and physical
            -means of restraint or behavior control.  Each of these documents has been
            screened by one or more staff members.
            Z.  On 18 November 1970, a report on an!           flashblindness simulation pro-
            p2osal was forwarded                It was concluded that it might not be  possible
            to extrapolate the pioposed simulation results to levels of flash intensity that
            would be useful operationally.  The risk of permanent eye damage at high
            licyht levels, furthermore, would not be clarified by the tests.  The performa.;,.@-,.
            tasks proposed were not detailed sufficiently to determine their relevance to
   2         real situations.  Several operational diawbacks of the flash blindness te chnique
            itself were pointed out, for example, the critical positioning of flares with
            respect to the subject by reason of the inverse square law, and the limited
            usefulness during the day-time, 'and the conspicuity of the technique at ni-ht.
            The short time of effectiveness makes this technique more useful as an ad-
            junct system than as a, primary2  behavioral  control  technique.  Primate  studies
            were suggested as a  means  of  establishing  damage  thresholds  and  performance
            decrements undcr actual (rather than simulated) flash conditions.
            3.  On 31 December 1970 a memorandum on the             --Inon-letlial clec-
            trificd net system was forwarded to             Unfortunately, the  data  provided
            by the manufacturer are not completely e3xplicit.  Based on certain assumptioii-,

              about the device, it was concluded Lliat a) tiiidcr soi-ne conditions the
              cotilci cause partial ineapacitatioi-i by paralyzing the subject's arms.; and that
              b) it woul4 be unlikely to kill licaltliy people.  Disadvantages of the system
              stei-i-i from the extreme2 variability of the skin resistance factor -- depending
              on surface contact area, liuniidity, bocly swkiat, etc. , the likeliliood of the-
              net shorting itself out, the ineffectiveness against fully clothed subjects (who
              might even be wearing gloves), and the probability that the subject, even
              though his arms were immobilized, could still run and free himself 2from the
              net.  The effectiveness of th         therefore, is open to question. A rough
                                         e
              circuit diagram of a device which fulfills the specifications of the
              was prepared.
              4.  Consideration has been given to a systematic approach to the incapacita-
              tion problem.  There is a spectrum of situations or scenarios in which immo-
              buization or restraint syst2ems would be desirable.  These range from a
              situation in which there is a single assailant (such as a hijacker) who must
              be subdued in the presence of a large number of innocent bystanders, to a
              one-to-one confrontation between individuals, to an individual (such as a
              diplomat) or small group surrounded by a large hostile crowd, to a full-scale
              riot situation.  Each of these situations has different technical requirements
          2    for an optimum.system.
              Incapacitation systems can be categorized in several other ways.  They may be
              grouped according to the general method used:
                                            Psycl-iological
                                            Impact
                                            Chemical
                                            Sensory
                                            Restraining
                                            Electr9ical
              or they May be categorized according to the agent employed
                                            Projectiles
                                            Bases
                                            Sound

                                            Light
                                            Slioclc. wavc
                                            Nets
                                            Bolas
                                            Polymers
                                            Drugs, etc.
             Regardless of what type O' device is used, certain attributes of each system
             need to be considered, as they apply to different scenarios:
                                   Degree of incapacitation
                                   Delivery System
                                   Length of incapacitation
                                   Speed of action
                                   Requirement for antidote
                                   Residual effects
                                   Lethality risk
                                   Risk of system failure/countermeasures
                   2                Range
                                   Covertness
                                   Suitable for individual (or group)
                                   Saf e ty of us e r
                                   Size and weight
                                   Environmental requirements
                                   Shelf lif e
                                   Trainin.g requirements
            Plans for future work
            Definitive work on a systematic evaluation of1 known and proi-.aising personnel
            incapacitation techniques awaits a conference withi
            tentatively scheduled for March, 1971.
            The following steps will be taken in the meantime:
            1) Literature search will  be  ca rried out as follows:
                                                      Document Collection
                                                   3-

                                                        Pocun-icnt Library (computer search)
                                                        1,N'Ledical Library
                                                              Library and
                                         Medical School Library
             2) Schematics for a       .-3."type device will be forwarded
             3) An evaluation of a patent of an cicctrificd 7projectile will be forwarded
               These reports are enclosed
                                                   -4-

                                   QUARTI-:RLY Tr-CI-]iN'ICAL PROGRR-SS RRPORT
                                           1 February 1971 - 30 April 1971
                    Technical pro-ress in this period was as follows:
                             1) Submission of pos  sible schematics for a.      ---7type device.
                             2) Evaluation of a patent of an electrified projectile.
   2                          3) Coi-npletion of literature search of the followine, libraries:
                                                              ocurnent collection
                                                             Document Library
                                                             i.Medical Library
                                                                   Library
                                             imedical Library
 2                                                   lpolice Academy Library
                             4)  Presentation of a group of status rg!ports to the Project Monitor
                                                       20 April 1971.  The items presented were:
                    during his visit
                             a) a general outline of the Behavioral Control Support programs
                                to date.
                             b) a summary of2 the Behavioral Control literature review
                             c) Brief descriptions of several real-life situations and possible
                                incapacitating agents applicable to eac-h (preliminary only)
                             d) Sug-estions for future activities under Behavioral Control
                                Support Project.
                       'Lhis report was submitted on IZ February 1971.  The possible schen-iatics
 2                      the        @are assentiall.y.--
                             a) -an auto        sysctn-L and
                                a DC '&.o DC.
                   An output voL!1,,a.g-e ri.' o-.Ily -@goo vol'Ls is specifieii in the pos.'Lu,'ated (a5
                   opposed t-o ZZ 8I<v for ti-ic     Sy-ste.,ni) 'f>ccause oi Lhe cxorc,-nely r,.!,@nort

                   life aiicl arcin- problems that would exist with the higher volta(le system.
                                 t@                                                0
                   2.  U. S. Patent 3, 523, 538 describes an t.-I(.-ctrical shocl,,-producing projec-
                   tile.  The projectile would be incapable of producing the "A'alse epilepsy, 2" as
                   claimed by the inventor, would have a limited range, and besides being
                   ineffective it could possibly liarn-i the victim.
                   3.  A description of the literature search is -iven under 4(B).
                   4.  The status reports presented to the Project Monitor will be found in attach-
                   rnents A, B, C and D.
                        4                                   2-

                                                                                             ALLi-i: A
                                          BEH.T\VIORAL CONTROL SUPPORT
                                               Clencral Otillint! of Pro,,ram
                     1.  Review Literature
                              a) Police and crii-iiinology            c) Patents and proposals
                            2  b) L\,Iedical and sciciilific           f) Science fiction, comics, etc.
                              c) Military                             g) Other
                              d) International
                     Z.  Describe the factors which constitute the   generaliz@cd con,'Iict/control
                         situations of interesl:
                              a)  number of antagonists
               2               b)  number of protagonists
                              c)  intensity range of hostilities (actual or predicted)
                              d)  time scale
                              e)  location/mobility/environmental factors
                              f)  availability of additional support
                              g)  effects desired
                                     i)  of.'ensive (calm, disperse, arrest, subdue, incapacitate2,
                                        immobilize)
                                    ii) defensive (avoid hostilities, self-protection, escape/fliaht)
                     3.  Prepare brief, representative real-life situations to serve as examples and
                         help generate ideas:
                              a) Surrounded automobile                d) the crowd
                              b) Lo,-le individual                    e) Pursuit
           2                   d) The snatch                           f) Protection of  individuals and
                                                                         property
                     4.  Study available and proposed weapons/devices and strategies in light of
                         desired effects and user-criteria dictated by various situations.
                     S.  Co.-npile lists of as yet undeveloped devices/weapons and recommend
      2                   design and bench testing of those judged most valuable.  Some possible
                         exa-,r,ples:
                              2         for similar ageni fo)r rapij, transcutaneous administration
                                  of rru@-s
                              b'@ Symc.hrGr@,i7@ed strobe lilhts and sound st-irnuli at. crit-,caA' @r:-equenc@-es
                              c)  Varic.K@,s U-ndL>tecta'-w-'Le (or sub-,hrcs.,I-ioici-y  insu;.ts
                                                                              Li            0-k)e c
                                                               10,v ps-i prait,-ct '@t:  -pr    11 d
   2                           C)
                         Respond to aie i@ac z,equiests, ror c.,ra.LuaLio-
                                                                        cor-
                                                                           .,cepts, proposals, pa-,.ents. c-,,:
                              a)
                              b)
                        7      c) Japanes:e. pazt.,7t@
                              d)  Others
                                      "-gal

                                                                                                                                 n,.:
                                            13EIIAVIORAL CON'I'TZOL LITZ.-LZATUi-ZT- ni@-.vIZW
                        To clite,  our scircli for bl!li;iviortl c-ozilrol liter;Ature has included the
                        following local libr-iries,  all of which yiel(lecl some information:
                              Departn,icnt
                                                              doctin-icnt library
                                                              n-iedic;il libriry
                                                                      general library
           2                                                       ,@nicclical library
                                                                                        'Police    Academy
                        The original 50 documents received at the start of the contract have been
                        thoroughly reviewed by Drs.                                                                      Those
                        publications, by nature o2f thc!ir pre-selection,  pertinence and                       variety,  are
                        still the core of our in-c.-tpacitation literature.   Several of them were used in
                        a pilot run in order to devise the evaluation form,  shown in At,achrnent A.
                        This   form   will   be   used   later   to    provide    quick    reference    to    factors    from
                        selected proposals and techniques.
     2                   In February .197 1,  all the literature then in our possession was scrccnc,-- ior
                        bibliographic references to other works.   A master list was m@Lde.                           Ifrom.
                        which library searches were conducted.   By March it had become obvious
                        which material was not available locally,  and those'items rerrainin- on the
  2                      list were then ordered through t4@!                                           (ZS unclassi-1-4L  e  d
                        documents) or through Washington (26 classified items).   As o.4' April 19,
                        si.%teen unclassified documents were still on order,  along with the class,.-.'iod
                        material.
                        The   library   work   also   incl2uded   a   search    of    card    c-atilols  and   inci@lcos   o,4@'
                                                          n
                                                           cnt top2.cs, as we         a.-7, a searc4'i ot
                                                   @kit;               vf thc@ Icrcali-y avliia.L-,41c
                             2                                                                            Lzlezzlu,-c  hzs
                                                                                 aLr,@d;        --.@c c r o s s - in de-v a:  o
                      are @ive.-i- in Attac.".ment- B)-        Ti,                  COaSiSLS Of           itcr.,,.S Z7,,,
                                                                      C 0

                                             Coiit-lusions
                Our literature seircli liis bet-ii coiiil)rcliciisivc enough to draw the following
                conclusions:
                                             turc does not mention any innovative hard-
                1.  As expected, the open liter.-i
                    warc wl-iic2h could be c-.-Lsily adipted to our purposes.
                Z.  The greatest concentration of publislied material has been in the
                    categories of liglit (flasliblindness), sound (all frequencies), electricity
                    (shock, clectronarcosis, electromagnetic radiation) and chemicals
                    (drugs and gases). Very little open literature is available on biolotical
   2                 weapons, odor,  temperaIture, vibration or applicable psychological
                    methods of incapacitation.
                3.  It appears tiiat certain gaps in the literature- can be filled only by
                    obtaining classified documents through Was@hincton.
                4.  The police literature is mainly concerned with riot control&.  The police
                    appear to be the recipients rather than the initiators o2f research inlo new
                    techniques of behavioral control.
                5.  Our group now has a broad and general conception of current incapacita-
                    tion devices and,techniqucg-.  The most profitable course for further
                    search of the literature would be to narrow our fields of interest (as
                    proposed in the program for the coming months), and collect in-Lorr.-,at2-@on
                    in those specialized areas.
                 6. An ongoing, gene
                                    ral survey.of published material concerning personnel
                                                                 cl foc%ls or di.rectiort
                    incapacitation will be maintainc&-31A@tu"s
                                ftiturc "3xo.6.g.-arn..
                                                   2-
                                                                  i    Rom

               L: IL' Li Iy                          '.St-rial No.  pi-    Doc. No.
          D.11c:
                                                     Title
               -----------
                                    @---------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------
            degrt:c of                                                                Remarks:
            lengiii of
    2      Speed ol Actip!i
          Residual J'ffects
         Lethility Risk
         Dependability
         Countermeasures
         Range
        Delivery System
        5ize/Wei,,ht
        CC)vertness
        Shc-If l,ife                                                                 Scenarios:
        3-tfc:tY/Tritinitig
          of User
          Grou,)
     7                                                                                                                        >
        )D-btit-
                                                      .... . .... ... . ..........

                                                                     Attachment B
                                         CIZOSS-INDEX CATEGORIES
                                        AD iitti-iiber
                                        Bibliogral-)Iiy
                                        Biolc)gical
                                        Central Nervous System.
                                        Che2mical
                                          drugs
                                          gases
                                        Electrical
                                        Facilities
                                        History
                                        Impact
                                        PI- number
                                        Proposal
                                        Psychological
                                        Restraining
   2                                     Sensory
                                          light
                                          odor
                                          pressure
                                          shock
                                          sound
                                          temperature
                                          vibration.
                                        Theory
                                        9Tolera.nce[Anticiot

                                               R-EAL-.Lll-7I,: SITUATIONS
                                         (Diploi-i-iat; Police; Stop and Search)
                   This situatioi-i ciitails one or two individuals inside t'heir car, surrounded
                                                                                     c
                   and outnui-i-ibered by a hostile gro2up, in a potentially unfriendly ' nvironment
                   such as a forei,,n country, riot area or inspection checkpoint.   The confined
                   space of the automobile can be an asset and must not become a     trap.  Pre-
                   installed incapacitation equipment can be utilized providing the  individuals
                   remain in their own car, otherwise portable equipment would be required.
                   The least amount of force ne2eded, either to calm the hostile croup or to
                   make a "getaway, " would be highly desirable from the standpoint of aood will;
                   tr),ing to calm the group can be expected to consume more time than ryetting
                   away  by car from a group which is on foot.  Safety for innocent bystanders
                   may be of limited concern.
                            Ir@c.ipacitators                      Protect2ion
                      persuasion (loudhailer)                 bullet proofing
                      lures (hand-outs etc.                   ear defenders
                      dyes                                    electric gtound
                      .s ,@-e Mc h                            gas mask
                      ,Qcaz, -as;                             gogales
                      ac-rosol.s.;   penetrants               independen2t air supply
                      car-too s?-zinkler                      sealed car
                      'i. e cx%.i;-..i@uisher
                            sar-, d, heat or smoke
                            r,-Tz"o,.v barrage
                      rnars,. . &,L
                                 booms: with oil, foam,
                                              srn2c%l-p
                                 rotat-ing s ic.@zs
                      car-tc>p
                      I        F,
                      L@CIL@-d sou,-,c
                      i,isecis (rele-ased outside caz-).
                      slick grotnJ s,,i:riace.
                   Protection is for the operators; 6some items listed could also be used
                   by antagonists as countermeasures.

                                                      I-ont, liiclivir!tiil
                    Perli.ips the n-iost vuliieriiile situitit)ii is Lli;it of a single person who ;,n;-iy
                    Iii-,ve          citiclet -igait-tmt Iiiiii, witli no vcliil:l2e nor ;ii-iy (.)Ilit:r nuurct: t@i
                    aid, who niust I)rotect Iiii-iiself otitdoors.  I-lis imn-iccliate need is'for small,
                    unobtr-,ir,ive cquipi-ncnt (and possibly protective gear) which lic c;,Ln instzlntly
                    utilize and rely on for coi-i-iplete incipacitation of his-assailant(s).  If the
                    gei-icral cnvironi-nent is unfriendly, lie may need to rc-usc the equipr@-,cnL. in
                    order to reach safety--
                      Lic,t,jacitators                                     Protec-tion
                    stench                                              bullet-proof vest
                    si-i-2ioke screen                                    car defenders
                    con-ibined sn-ioke and gas                          gas mask
                    tcar cas                                            goggles
                    aerosols; slzin irritants                           inflatable plast:Lc hclmct
                          I                                             inflatable plastic shie'Ad
                    inip.ict balls that break:                          pocket bicycle
                      s2-i-ioke, stench, LMace
                    darts with dru,-s
                    n't.-irst',n-iallow barrage
                    ta,-'fy pellets
                    niglit stick/baton
                    shock
                    karatc/judo
                    Stun gun
                    bi,, net
                    -Lcil5iesives
                    bolas
                    slick foai-ii (sprayed or hurled)
                    licat-seekin,Q device to trip, tackle
                    in      'Da, r it. z
                                                             -z-

                 In this 'tilitioti the i(lvint-ige is witli sev(!i-al persons wi-io Wish to
                        I
               .inca,3acit.ite oi-it! or two otliers, in an oulcloor ciivironnient such as a war
                       Because ilic oper;ttioji ii-itist I)c swift -tnd perhaps2 surre-I)titious, it
                 ZOI'lc.
                 i-tiay well be nocturnal.  Protection of bystinders or -,)ropcrty is prob.-t'oly
                               Inc.-tpaciLation teci-iniqucs must be fast-acting, rnay requ-re
                 unnecessary.                                                           4
                 protection for the operators, a2nd should leave the vi@tim in a subdued but
                 moveable condition.  Any devices used should be portable or -- if the
                 location is known beforehand -- deployable.
                  IncaDacit-.itors                                 Protec-tion
                 instant barrier fence                           beekeeper's suits
                 radio-controlicd barrier with heat,             'tamouflage s2uits
                  light, -srnol,,e, stench                       ear defenders
                 plastic cocoon                                  gas masks
                 taffy pellets                                   goggles
                 nets, snares, adl-icsives
                 ciarts with drugs
                 water liose,
                 karate/judo
                 do,,s
                 ni,,I-it stick/baton
 1                ayes (including inirared)
                 c i-icn-i ic als smoke
                 tear gas
                 ,V, a c e
                 aerosols
                 blo%vn sana, dust
                 swarm of insects
                 soil

                                                            (7
                   Beii.ivioral coiitrul of ;t crowd is 1)rc)bibly the most complex siLuaLion to be
                   cozisidcrecl.                      I)ot(!ntiilly hostile as a "mob". must be
                   controlled btit not I-).-trticulirly liart-iic.-d.  In -icl(lition. fringe p-trtit-il);ints rncl
                   -iclj.-iccnt property si-iotilcl be protected.  A prii-i-iiry mellio(i of cont'rol is ti-.r
                                                                                                     ough
                   dispersal of the crowd, which            they must retain their i-nobili2ty to some
                   degree.  Tccliniqtics of control which allow griditions of int(:nsity 6.1 action
                   and -Ln expan-diblc time fran-ic are recommended.  Metlio(Is of control are
                   more lir,-iitcd if the crowd is gathered indoors.  Devices should be portable
                   although their deployment2 beforehand may, in some cases, be possib'Le, and
                   pre-inst.illcd devices on official vehicles may be available.  Overt technicues
                   have positive and negative aspects: they may intimidate the crowd or they
                   i-nay become tirgcts for the c-rowd's hostility.  Selective incapacitation ol'@ tl-e
                   crowd's leaders is an effective technique.  The operat2ors in this situat-&on
                   often consist of a large, trained group such as the police; in any case, safety
                   of the operators i-i-iay depend on their protective gear.
                     Inca,aacitators
                   lures (spectacle elsewhere etc.                    marshmallow barrage
                   runior control/oratory                             nets/snares
                   louclhailer (pers2uasion - drowning                 bariicades
                     noise - synchronized sound)                      dogs/horses
                   s),nc.iron-A:zcd strobe + sound, pulses            insects
                   robot rovers that emit flashes, heat,
                     chemicals, sn-ioke, stench, or
                    -@Ora@* j" St                                     Protection
                   e.-<I2.c@-,rJ@Lble  that emit same
                   1; gilt
                                                                      beekeeper's hc'Amet
                         ica,-n g,7cnades                             t:ar defenders
                   'bubbles                                           earphones
                   slick surface/'oi.1,                               gas masks
                   stench   2                                              le-s
                   dye                                                Z.Uvbe-r- boots
                   smol<.c
                   cher'nicals: tear gas, ]@4lac-e
                   balls that L-rca.k,
                   aerosols
                   drug darts for ri:LZ
                   car-top sprink.,'L@-mr
                9   n.
                   Lght sticks/ba;z@OMLIS
                                                           -4-
                       77!P@                        - - - --------- ------ -

                                                     Pursuit
                   This situation may follow that of the "Surrounded'Autoi-nobilc:" one or two
                   persons in a car are I)cing ,)tirstiecl I)y i-lic oc.(:tip.Li-its of another car, in what
                   must be considered an unfriendly environment.  The ;Advanta,,,,cs to be
                   exploited are: maneuverability of the vehicle (to utilizl- wind direction, for
                   example); pre-installation of devices; protection afforded by the car 's own
                   sliieldin,,.  Devices should be covert when not in use, quick acting because
                   the pursuers may have lethal weapons, and capable of stopping the chase.  This;
                   may be accomplish2ed by: incapacitating the following driver, immobilizing the
                   pursuit car, obs curing its path, barring its path, or disguisinc, the operators'
                   car or occupants.  Re-use of the chosen techniques may be required if more
                   than one vehicle joints the pu-rsuit.
                            Inca-oacitators                       Protection
                      license-plate change                   bullet proofing
                      ex2ternal chanae in car's color, etc.   goggles
                      pop-up people in lead car
                      smoke screen
                      blown sand
                      paint on windshield
                      foam (on road or windshield)
                      oil slick
                      lic,',it beam (nighttime)
                      instant barrier
                      wire across road, about 48" high
                     .extendable boom (if close behid)
                      pop-up deterrent shapes
                      tei'.ral.-,edrons
                      nails strewn on road
                      .c,:)lling shapes strewn on road
                             barr:er attached bv wires
                        to lead car
                      explosion urder car
                      gas grenade
                                                           5-

                                         Protection of Iiiclivirlilll,, ;in(i Pro,,-)(!rty
                      A I-)rcvcntive -tiici clclcnsive sitti.-ition occli rs wlit!n the loc,-tic of ;i ,)crson
                                 1,,cr) or L piece of 13ropti2rty (store subject to lootin,-) n-iust be
                      (public spc.-L                                                   L@
                      protected.  Atiti.Lilxnts c.-Ln       from -iny clir(-ction but tl-%t- I-)rc.-Lf-ctr-d
                      object rentiiiis st@itionary.  Ome or more "bodyguards" p2rovide the clc&'cnse
                      against. one or more -tsstilai-its.  A rearonil.)ly friendly environrr-icnt can DC
                      supi)oscd, wl-iicli limits the tiscable techniques to tho'se which will not
                      seriously affect bystanders (nor the operators, the protected individual or
                   2   the property).  The devices should be aimed directly at the offenders only,.
                      and should reliably incapacitate them.  The degree of incapacitat-,on can
                      depend on the sevcrity of the attackers' intended crime.  In all cases it seems
                      desirable that the devices be quick-acting, portable and covert, so that they
                      can be used in a variety of @"stay-put" circumstances.
                       Inc,vpacitators                                    Protection
                      rhetoric                                          instant plastic shield
                      electrical shield
                      li<,I-it bean-i
                      t.-ifiy pellets
                      I-Lurled foam, smoke
                      ,,vlace
                      dart with drug
7                      jet-Dropellcd medicine ball
                      bol@
                      karate/judo
                      nig'nt stick/baton
                      s@ tun gun
                      balance disruption

                    ------------
                                       BEI-JAVIORAL CONTROL SUPPORT
                                  Proposed Program for Co:itinuation of @Vork
                   1.  Consider overall goals and strategy.  Our inclination is to pursue an inno-
                   vative or creative approach to the probleni rather tii;An to devote our encr-ies
                   t2o compiling yet another systuniatic review of currently ;Available incapzlcita-
                   tion and bcl-iavioral control techniques.  There is, of course, a possibility that
                   no useful new ideas would be produced, but a systematic approach,  it  would
                   seem,  would  practica Ily guarantee that result.
                   2. 'Proceed with further literature review.  It appears that somethin- like
         2                                                                               0
                   90,@o of the information to be.had in the ordinary literature is now in hand.
                   Rather than waste much more time  in  assembling  and  screening  masses  of
                   literature for a diminishing yield, the following -s-teps are proposed:
                             a) continue aeneral screening and search on a maintenance or low-
                         2       effort basis.
                             b) spend a week browsing through allied fields:. anesthesiology,
                                psycholo gy, psychiatry, physiology, optics, etc. for fresh ideas. -
                             c) consider spending several days to a week of intensive  research
                                at one or two of the best criminology or medical-legal collectio.-is
                                or libraries available (FBI?  Harv2ard? Justice?  LEAA?).
                             d) consider examination of far-out literature: occult, science
                                fiction, comic books, etc. on a low-effort basis
                             e) consider foreign sources of information
                    3,.@- Approach people with expertise and/or talent-if feasible, e. g.
                             Authorities on pertinent subjects
                                                      Lt.2 Col. ; Riot Control Specialist)
                                                       (self defensel
                                      Army Researcr. Centers. such as Edgewood Arsenal (pro-
                                        je c tile S)
                    4. Consider ho]dA:n@- an interdisc',Lp'Linary workshop with individuals liavin---,
                    technical expert ise in appror)yiat8e areas such as criminology, weapons, psyc'no'&%-@
                    e tc.

                   5.  Conduct feasibility studies of proil-iisin,, new approaches.  For ex;Arnple,
                   one potentially irtiitful rt.-searcli art!a, probably worth evaluating, involves
                   cheii-iicals such as                            which rapidly penetrate the
                   skin and may serve as carrier vehicles for  chemi2cal agents for bi-havioral
                   control.  The control agent (e. g. , irritant, anesthetir-, synaptic blocker, etc)
                   could be mixed with the skin penetrant and delivered in liquid, gal or aerosol
                   form via projectiles, for accurate delivery to individuals, or via sprayers,
                   for ,roup administration.  Other techniques, such as                    could
                   also be evaluated.
               4    6.  Exploratory animal studies.  Brjef,  preliminary studies with promising
                   chemical or physical techniques may be   attempted if time permits and
                   conditions justify such an effort.
                                                          2-

                          QUARTERLY TECIINICAL PROGRESS REPORT
                                        1 May - 31 July 1971
             Technical work during this period was directed primarily towards collection,
             cataloging, review and appriasal of documents related to all aspects of
             personnel incapacitation.  More than 160 documents have been so processed
             and many others have been screened.  While there are dozens of good
             libra2ries throughout the country which have not been visited, the diminishing
             returns from our literature search suggest tha-t we are in touch with the
             largest bulk of thought on this subject.  Further intensive literature review
             would appear to add little, other than detail, to the information already at
             hand.
             A great effort has also been made to conceive of "new" approaches to the
             problem of non-lethal behavioral control.  Discus5sions between project rrem-
             bt-rs and unclassified exchanges with others have been initiated.  Very little
             ttioaght which could be described as "new" has resulted from this.  So far,
             only two possible techniques, not reported in the available literature, would
             appear to warrant further consideration.

               A further review will be carried out to determine whether either  or  both  of
               the above techniques are actuall y feasible.
               A course of action has been formulated for presentation to the project moni-
               tor in August.  Briefly, the remaining contract effort will be directed as follows:
               1.  Literature review: A continued effort will be made to acquire and review
               new documents and other mat2erial related to personnel incdpacitation.  It is
               expected that no more than 101o of the remaining effort will be spent in  this
               activity.
               2. Evaluation of "new" methods of  personnel  behavioral  control:  An  effort
               will be made to determine the feasibility of using agents such as
                    )for incapacitation of humans.  This research would be preliminary,
               being limited to theoretical considerat2ions.  No "bench" testing or animal
               testing is envisaged at this time. If possible, other new concepts  will  also
               be generated and examined.  Approximately 30% of the remaining effort,will
               be spent on "new" techniques.
               3.  A state-of-the-art review will be prepared using a system approach to
               the incapacitation problem.  Each group or family of techniques will be
               consid ered separately.  Some of the major0 categories are as follows:
                                 Missiles, ballistics/impact
                                 Light, electromagnetic radiation
                                 Sound
                                 Electric currents
                                 Drugs, chemicals
                                 Physical restraint

                              Psychology, verbal persuasion
                              Miscellaneous (odor, slippery foam, etc)
             Various aspects of each group of techniques will be reviewed, for example-
                              Physical aspects of the agent
                              Delivery system
                              Physiological, biochemical or psy@hological mechanisms;
                                   medical considerations
              2                Results or effects, type and degree of performance decrement
                              Operational factors (portability, reliability, etc)
                              Possible applications and limitations
                              Recommendations
           -Descriptions of any new techniques which appear feasible will be included in the
             report.
             Administrative Aspects
                                      an analyst who has done much of the lite2rature re-'
             search on this project will be terminating   (employment as of I October 1971.
                                   a physicist and research analyst, will continue
                     work.            holds current TOP SECRET and Special Clearances
             with                                  M.D., who also holds TOP SECRET
             and Special Clearances, will work on--the medical and clinical aspects of this
             project.
             2.  As of 31 July 21971, only 23. 31o of the available funds had been spent (com-
             pared with a projected 757o).  Accordingly, work on the project is considerably
             behind schedule and it will be necessary to request an extension of time, without
             additional funds, to complete the work.  A six-.months no-cost extension to
             30 April 1972 is therefore requested.
                                                  3-
                      065@

                        QIJARTERLY TECHNICAL PROGRESS RI-:PORT
                               I November 1971 - 31 January 1972
            Dur-li-ig this quarter, our main emphasis has been on the preparation of a series
            of reports, based on a systems approach to several groups or families of
            techniques for incapacitation. Rather than to re-review superficially every
            possible type of incapacitation technique, our effort has been concentrated2  in
            areas 1) where a medical or physiological evaluation (as opposed to ballistics,
            pyrotechnics, etc.) would offer a useful contribution; 2) where there appeared
            to be some promise of usefulness of the technique, and 3) where a technique
            appeared to be new or insufficiently studied.
            A-report entitled,                              As a Vehicle For Incapacitating
            Agents, 11 was completed in December and forwarded t2o                       not
            appear to be a promising vehicle for administration of  incapacitating  agents,
            principally because of the long time required for "carried." substances to
            reach peak blood concentrations.  Any dosage large enough to provide rapid in-
            capacitation would be dangerously large, if not fatal, at the time of maximum
            blood concentration.  Besides being slow, too many variables affect the abs6rp-
            tion of,   2  lagent combinations and the fact that the technique cannot be used
            surreptitiously offers several possibilities  for  countermeasures.  A  second,
            informal report on the "Possible Interaction Between
                          was submitted in January.
            The report on non-penet@ating impact, completed in late January was scheduled
            for submission early in February, 1972.  In spite of the widespread use of billy
            clubs, special o2rdnance rounds and other impact devices, useful incapacitation
            by means of impact remains either unreliable (at the "safe" extreme) or
            hazardous at levels which will reliably incapacitate the subject.  Blows to the
            genitalia in males and high-velocity, low-mass impacts appear to be the only
            truly safe methods of incapacitation.  The latter is of "only limited effectivenebs.
                                                   e                        as 4 a  possible
            The next two activities will be brief r'views ofi

                 incapacitating agent and of the                         iclectric shock system.
                                                     Adn-iinL!@L@@@
                  E:xpenditures to date:
                                                   Quarter             70            cumulative
                                                                      f Total          AmoLnt                  of Total
                               2                    Amount             0
                                                                                                                 1.  z
                  Nov 1970-Jan 1971             $                      1.   2        $
                                                                                                               15.   6
                                                                      14.   4
                  Feb - Ap2r 1971                                                                               z3.   3
                  May-Jul 1971                                         7.   7
                                                                      ZZ.   3                                  45.   6
                   Aug-Oct 1971                                                                                76.  6
                   Nov 1971-Jan       1972                            31.   1
                                                                          z-
                                                                                                                                         r

                            Fl,-\'AL Tr-CI-1,NICAT Pr-,OGr\ESS R-,ZPORT
                                 I February 1972 - 30 April 197Z
           Du.-in(, the fin-il quarter the last Systei-ns-oricnterl report was I-)reparcd -I.-id
           subi-i-iitted:                @ti-i
                                is a relatively safe incapac2itatiii- acyent, variat,.ons
           While               I                                0  C),
           in individual susceptibility, possible delayed effectiveness due to breath-
           holdin- and difficulty in rapid, surreptitious delivery especially in a lar-e
           room that is  not reasonably airtight -- limit its ilsefulness as an incapa-
           citatinr, ac@ent.
           Major emphasis during this qua2rter-was  also placed on providin", in a readily
           avaifable form, the maximum amount of practically useful  informac;-on  from
           previous reports. To this end, unclassified versions of-the reports on clec-
           tric shock and non-penetrat-Lng impact were subnitted: Inca-,3acitatio@-i of Cri-
           r,ninal.s by Non-Penetrating Impact and Incanacitation of Cri@-n,-nals b-,, Elect-ric
           Current.
            .L                                                                     aone
           O' all the specific incapac.-LL-at-on systems e.,:a,-,nined, the           ars
           to be the most pro.-nis-.,-i,-,.  Dr.
                                                               lcardiolo,);.st, Dr.
                 visited         2                         land subr.7,'iztc(@ a s-,:)eciai re-
           port on their dev;-ce, with recornrnendations @'or aniinal siud",.ts would
           help validate the physio'ioolical sal-L'cty of this incapacitation cC.'c!7,,@-.Ique.
           TI-ie final activity ui-,cdcrtaken uncier this pro;ect2 was a brief acl h(),7 ;7t.-v4,Cw of
           the Soviet 'techn4@que known as Kirlian photo-.-.-ii,-iy. - Biolo-ical nia@,oz-ials, .vlicn
                                                                    CD
           Placed alon- wi,",i photo-raphic "-.Im in a h4,,.@-.-vo'ta-c rad,.o 2o q -,1,2 r, c y f @- 0 ', d
                                          'eta'ls of 'Li-,c object not vis:'.-I@l.o urdc:- o::@@:.-.a@-y
           ,)roduce a -
                     .,)icture which shows ci
           ii-ht.  Witi-, ',,@ic heII3 of
           'Liie subject, 7a si,,nple instrument was developed and sat-@s@'zLeLory
           photo,,raphs were obtained in both color and black-and-wli-xte.

            Summary of reports, letter reports and substantive reviews submitted under
            Project
               Letter report on U.S. Patent 3, 5 23, 538
                                       witli circuit cliagram
               Lt:tter report on
               30 April 1971 Status reports:
                      General Pro-ram Outline
                                  0
                      Behavior Control Literature Review
           2           Real Life Situations
                      Program for Continuation of Work
               Report: Electric Current as an Aaent for Personnel Incapacitat:lon
               Report:       'las a Vehicle for Incapacitating Agents
               Report: Non-Penetrating Impact as an Agent for Personnel Incapacitation
               Report:                ]as an Incapacitating Aaerit-
               Letter report: Possible Interactions Between
               Letter report: Trip Report "2Visit to
               Report: Incapacitation of Criminals by Non-Penetrating Impact
               Report: Incapacitation of Criminals by Electric Current
               Ad Hoc Report: Investigation.of Kirlian Photography
               6 Quarterly Technical Progress Reports, which includes the Final
                      Technical Progress Report and,
               16 Monthly Contract Status Reports, which includes the final monthly
                      report.
                     2                            -Z-

                                                             Acln-iinistrative Aspect
                      Expenditures    to     date:
                                                         Quarter                 %                   Cumulative                        %
                                                         Ai-i-iotint.        of  Tot-.II                An-ic)titit               or TC)IZLI
           2           Nov 70 - Jan 71                   $                          1.               $                                 1.  2
                      Feb - Apr 71                                               14.  4                                             15.  6
                      May- Jul 71                                                 7.  7                                             23.3
                      Aue, - Oct 71                        2                      22.  3                                             45.  6
                      Nov 71 - Jan 7Z                                            31.  1                                             76.  6
                      Feb 7Z - Apr           72                                  23.  4                                            100.  0
                                                                                7 3-

