                                      NON-LETHAL PERSONNEL BEI-IAVIORAL CONTROL
                          General Considerations:
                                     l.' Possiblecontract..fora-year-ormorebutmay-be.,,..,-,',-,-,
                          supported by increments.
                                     2.  In essence, the' effort would be primarily concerned
                          with providing biological-ps2ychological scientific advice and guidance
                          to support behavioral control systems being fabricated and tested by
                          other concerns and/or to recommend the development or abandonment
                          of plans to undertake R&D concerned with potential behavioral -control
                          systems.
                                     3.  The above may include, but not be limited to:
                                          (a) 2  Evaluation of status and progress of on-going
                          projects.  For  instance, (a) the use of h;lgh intensity lial-it, with
                          minimum- r.Ls-k-of -perman-ent-r.,--tLnal Aama e,,-as-a.,behdvioral-control.-.....---,-,-
                                                                     9
                                                2                          either in isolation or in -
                          system, and (b) use of
                          combination with                _Jfor tempor@ary individual restraint,
                          the system being activated from a distance.
                                          (b)   Evaluation of currently available literature, and
                          research project@s underway to determine the feasibility of developing
                      2    a                             -ithat would meet the incapacitation
                          requirements.
                                          (c)   To conduct scientific "ar-rnchair"eval-Liations of
                          potential incapacitation systems, i.e.,(.
                                     electrical c-Lirrent, etc.
                                          (d)   To undertake  supporting laboratory studies
                          as6   appropriate.

