                                                               AND WELFARE
                      DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, EDUCATION
                                         PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE
                                         27 September 1961
       A44iction &"catch Center
     U.S. Public Health Servict Hospital
        t4zington, Xestuckr
                         alled rri,-,"-on this  date  concerning  diphosphopyridina-
       nucleotide and alcohol.   I promised  him I would  write  him  concerning
       the information I have  on this.
       I have th- "Tnformation for Clinical Inv6stigators" prepared by
       Abbott T-aboratori6s.  7re material is undated and consists of an
       introductory section which attempts to  bu2ild  UD  a  theoretical  back-
       ground for the use of DPN.  The second section is on the chemistry of
       the material; section 3 on the pharmacology,  is  blank;  section  4  on
       clinical studies,  deals  with  hangover'in  nonalcoholic  subjects.  7re
       studies were done on only 2 men, and apparently there were no measure-
       mnts on blood alcohol or blood acetaldehyde levels.  Section 4B
       deals with treatment of alcohol withdrawal2 syndrome, and section 5
       with dosage recommendations, afta!,.vit@.ich references, precautions, and
       contraind'ications table, and suggested forms are given.
                I
       I also have a paper, "Pyridine nucleotides in the prevention,
       dia,o,mosis'arid treatment of' problem drinkers" by Paul O'Hollaren,
       West. J. Surge., @@. (2) 101-104., 1961.
       Ilhe material in both of these reports is unconvincing.,  but  'oossibly
       some little work,mic-ht be indicated.  Since the theoretical background
       is hypothesized, more rapid  removal  of  acetaldehyde..  determinations
       of blood alcohol, and blood acetaldehyde levels should be done if
       behavioral changes indicate any  gross  effects  on  either  drunkenness
       or hangover.
       As I also told Dr. Treichler, T am embarking2    on a'study of cro ss
       tolerance betizeen scopolamine and JB-318 and LSD.  '@le are just
       beginning the first Dhase, which will involve determination of proper
       dose range for scopoiamine and JB-318 intramuscularly.  Following
       this, comparative potency evaluations will be  made,  after  which  tlie
       chronic tolerance phase would be undertaken.
                                          Sincerely,
                              4            Harris Isbell., M'.D.
                                          Director

