 41
                                                                                      ERNMENT
                    i','MCMO
                                   rajid                            STZES-1@
                 cc                         um
          offi@
                                                                              TE:
                                                                        9    DA
          TO
          FRONE
                                                   cc
                                               ti

              D R A F-T
                                                                                             4@
              TO         DCI
              FROM       Director of Security
              SUBJ=:     ARTICHOKE
                         Experimental Project    Utilizing  Trainee    Volunteers
              1.  PROBLEM:
                  a. 'In perfecting the ARTICHOKE     technique., it is considered    essential
                       that in t2he training of personnel participating in       this    program
                       they have an opportunity to employ this technique,       under controlled
                     'circumstances, to selected male volunteer trainee personnel.
                  b.   Test situations can thereby be created which will be of great
                       value in perfecting ARTICHOKE techniques and training of the
                                                                                  2            8
                       ,@le.rsonnel who will utilize ARTICHOKE in future field operation
              2.  DISCUSSION:
                  a.  It is planned that            ice of Security,   Medical Division
                                                id Office of Training will participate actively
                       in this program,.
                  b.   Representatives                       11  participate  in  2an   observer
                       statui.
                  c.   Through  the cooperation of the Office of Training, selected male
                       trainees  will be  screened  by  the  Medical  Division  and  Office  of
                       Security, and volunteers will then be obtained.
                  d.   Through cooperation 0             est situations will be prepared for@
                                              4ort
                       indoctrina@lon of volunteer subjects.
                  a.   Office  of Security will   furnish  sa.fe-house   premises    for.conduct of
                       the experimental   work,
                                                                             ago-'a
                                                                                                    IMF,

                                                         4W.,
                 f.  Medical Division will furnish medical support and necessary
                      substances for use in experiments.
                  9        1-1 furnish new substances and advice as to their utilization,
                  h.. It is not anticipated that this program will require a large
                      expenditure of funds as no personnel are to be procur@id nor any2
                      large qvantity of equipment purchased.  Transportation to the safe-
                      house can be provided from Agency facilities and purchase of food
                      for personnel involved will probably be ti@e only major expenditure.
                      It is estijnated that $3,000 will cover operating expenses of this
                      project during FY 1953-54 and $1,000 will cover cost of essential
  2                    medical equipment.
             3.  RECO@aIE14DATIONS:
                  a.  That above-mentioned experimental program be authorized.
                  b.  That Office of Training be authorized to make volunteer subjects
                      available for program.
                  c.  That requested funds be made available.
                  d.  That concurrence of General Counsel be secured.
                                         7                 Direbtor of Security
              CC)NCURRENCES:
                                                          ACTION BY APPFtOVI,iG AUrIlOF1,I'FY:
              Medical Division
                                                          Director of Central Intelligence
               Office of Training                                      Date

