                                                   This Document corl-.ists of 4 paces
                                                   Copy     of     copies
                                 SIXTHASONTHLY PROGRESS REPORT
                                      December 20, 1965
                                     Contract No.

                                                                      page 1 of         pages
                      r.     SUAII\ILARY
                             During  the  precedincr  month  of  November  196.5,  protress  continued
                      in the following task areas:
                             1.    Mini@Lture Recorder Development
                             2.    Animal Trainin- Faci'Alities'Directory
                      Prorrress  is on schedule in each of these areas.
                             PROGRESS ON T.8,SKS
                             -A.   Miniature Recorder
                                   Analysis, of the results thus far in the experimentation with
                      photo-sensitive filaments  as  the  basis  for  a  miniaturized  sound  recorder
                      has progressed to a point where feasibility has been established ai@d
                      future development necessitates further proarammina.  A three-iohase
                      program is envisioned as the logical approach to development leading
                      up to a prototype design.
                                   1.     Standardization of E  iilsion and Coating Procedure
                                                               m
                                          A known emulsion speed and its control 2are essential
                      to the response, recordincr and resolution of readout for both test and
                      operatincr purposes. A  solution  to  the  problem  of  developing  an  emulsion
                      having consistent and uniform properties will require further experimen,@-a-
                      tion.  7ne services of an emulsion consultant .-.,ould expedite development
                      of this particular phase.
             2                      2.     Refinement of Recorder
                                          Further  develooment  and  refinements  in   the   equipment
                      and procedures for the recordinrr rnechai-ii-sm, li,-rht modul.ation,  filamen4'
                      handlina and emulsion deve'Lopment are required prior to protot  c desitn.
                      A combination  labor-@tory  and  darl.@room  and  some  specialized  equi@-)mcnt
                      would be required for this 1:)hise.

                                                                             of       pa,-,cs
                                                                     Page  2
                                                         -2 -
                                   3      RL--,idoiit Eq ii-),-nent Dclvclo-)mcnt
                                          An experimental apparaus designed to pbrmit
                   2                                                                        recoff-
                         nizable readout is necessary for system testing and identification of un-
                         ex ected requirements.  Design and fabrication of this equipment can be
                         .P
                         iestricted to that sufficie'nt only to provide mean-@ngful measurements.
                             Efforts during the past month have also been devote2d to a pre-
                                                                              m aa
                         liminary evaluation of the feasibility of emplo3,ina a   _,netic substance
                         coating of the 15 denier nylon monofilament  by  a  proces s similar to that
                         employed for the photographic emulsion.  Contacts have been made with
                         suppliers of magnetic iron oxides and materials are currently on hand
   2                      for the initial tests.
                                                      -res are ap
                              Three distinct advan'ta,           rarent in the emr)loymcnt of a
                         maernetic  process as opposed to a photographic recording process.  A
                         magnetic system would permit immediate playback, negate photo
                         processing facility requirements, and expedite development by d2raxving
                         from the readily-available technology in this area.
                              B.     Animal Traininz Facilities Direc@orv
                                     Progress in this  task area is essentially complete with the
                         delivery of three compilations of the followina descriptions.
                                     1.    Catalo-aue of Trainers and Facili-tLies (Consumers Guide)
               2                            This it em contains the identification o-A" six soccies of
                         animals, includin the cat,   dog, pie,-eon, croxv, starlin , and marine
                                           9                                      9
                         mamals,cross-indexed by behavioral scien46-.sts, traine,-. perfo.-mer acts,
                         exhil--i-tor, and supplier (non-breeder).  Selected texts on the tr,@i.rinfr and
                         care for each of 'he forctoinrr spccies are relperenced in the catalogue.
                                            A complete dossier on the cat was include%-A' as a sample
                         to illustrate one method of prescn4,-,nff roadv-refcrel-ice material.

                                   2.    Di,-ec-tory of               'LY-avlilzble At-iLm
                     +wenf.y. eigkt -reptiles 2r%d aynpl&ihtanq ab4ift                    forizs-
                     wiLA lifa  Lrc-               to -a 6owA -Cov.-ce for p@rocuteme2nt-witaiu
                     -t@e cont;-Ii-ertal LT-,ii-Iee. Ste@-@-s.
                                   3@                                            A.-i-;-- C'
                                      2 00 0) of             c u! c @7c; o- s  ,he L--az
                                                           A,&
       2                              consi.@-fs o-@@@          sz;L-@ --ts @-e- ng TO        C.1
                      LZ+-'-zs, i-wehavior and                                                'c;
                            T;,
                                     FOR COivi+.-'-@-,,@C-
                                           -re R
                    2                  n i, t,-  e_orc:er
                                   inves+.igatc. vario-t)             .-..e+.'!.-.-ods and     s
                                                     Cf   1
                                     @arce
                                   test                                 pcr.e-.-i'.ial
                                         o  -,@;e coa'Lt.-
                                   r@F aiid Cplbcol-
                                                        of -t.:ke pa.-ameterp. and             relatinj
                                                         investLIata propo!;L-d s--.7s---s'thravak re-

                                                                pa-c  4 of      pages
                                                     -4-
                                                "D COSTS
                     IV.  ADMINISTRATIONTAI                           For the period 30 April to 30 Noveriber, 1965, a total of
                     has been expended (representing 611,"o of contract funds).  Total percenta-C
                 01   of
