                                      III NOR
                         kprimarily in a support capacity)
                1.  Advised     of a method for taggi.ng      to permit
                    tracing clandestine transport routes.   Method  now
                    operational.
                2.  In cooperation with      obtained'--'-'@'har:iware
                    and ele--tronic gear from derelict    2   and
                    initiated analysis in agency
                3.  6!scovered portable water filtration units effective
                    to 10 microns in cooperation  with  ..)  Units  now
                    being evalualed by  ' Ifor :field use.
                4.  Participated in development of'.
                    whose function does not deteriorate upon direct
                    exposuxe to water, salt -water, silt, mud,  aquatic
            2        vegetation, ote., for use by            /personnel.
                5.  Assistance given to               idivision in  helping
                    establi5b biological parameters and limitations on
                    exposure of man to microwaves in air.
                                              terial completely  impervious
                6.  Discovered a            ma
                    to water, saline, and body fluids.  This  material  has
                    been brought to the attention of  ..,Ielectronies groups.
                                lin identification of analogue  data  from.
                7.  Assisted
                S.  Identified a compound which             in  contact
                    with air which has potential utility in signalling
                    devices of interest to
                9.  Have identified specific drugs
                   2              for elements of
                1,0. Participated in evaluation of eye damage from exposiire
                    to                                     Isupplied facilities
                    and personnel to perform this evaluation.
                                                        'Iguidance  system
                11. Participated in development of a
                    with perso-
                               inel of   .1ut6ilizing a

