                                                                               20 July 1970
                           M ORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
                                    Visi:t on. -Z-gul to'
                           SUBJECT:
                               1.  The primary purpose of this visit was to review the proposed
                           project in the area of nonlethal personnel incapacitation and to
                           2become acquainted with the personnel and facilities available for
                           prosecution of the research effort.  As one might judge from the
                                               ireput                         acilities    an(tper-
                                                     ation, the quality of f
                           Eonnel are outstanding.  The writer was given a tour of the
                                                            -but d2id not visit the,
                                       fsite, which will be available for prototype     system
                           tests if required.
                               2.  The                 remote, secure, and possesses    limited
                           laboratoxy,-capability-,.-block-bDuse-Sioz--e.-,cp-lozivp--t@eating.,--2azimal.
                           quarters-, and other specialized equipment  which  is  not  relevant  to
                           the present project.
                                3.  The individuals assigned prime responsibilities for the
                           incapacitation project have worked extensively on other Agency tasks
                           and have a realistic concept  of  the  requirements  for  this  project.
                           However, considering the breadthof the2 task, i.e., the probable
                           incapacitating effects of various energy sources on the human (lig7nt,
                           sound, impact, electricity,  etc.),  the  project  cannot  be  conducted
                           by any two or  three  individuals.  Rather  data  and  information  must
                           be obtained from a  great  variety  of  medical  and  allied  scientific
                           disciplines.  This  diversity  of  professional  2talent  exists  at  the
                                                jand will provide technical input to the project.
                           In order to utilize the services of these internal and some external
                           consultants, without the necessity for obtaining security clearances
                           on all of them,,                       Imust  be  established.  It   was
                           tentatively agreed that an                      fwould be t9hat the
                           research is concerned with nonh@Liirdou"s 'r@io'@ control systems.  This
                           matter will be discussed with appropriate Agency security personnel.

                             4.  In addition to personnel assignment, other details of the
                        proposal were discussed.  For instance, the cost breakdown is not
                        clear from the proposal submitted.  These items included:  travel
                        requirements and authorization, fees for consultants, and use of
                        animals.  The questions were resolved to the satisfaction of the
                        writer and wil2l be discussed with the cognizant Agency contract
                        negotiator.
                             5.  The inmediate action is to:  @l),obtain Blue-Book project,
                        approval as soon as possible; (2) forward bibliographies and all
                        other available reports collected duriRg__@he in-house study of
                        incapacitation systems; and (3) after -       lpersonnel have had
               0         sufficient time to review these materilis, m(;e-i with them to estab-
                        lish a firm experimental program with priorities of effort.
                                                        2

