                                                   Mission
                          1.  The                                   I'Division of     was
                     established in June 1965 and tasked with the responsibility of carry-
                     ing out research and development  in  support  of  intelligence  requir e-
                     ments in the behavioral activities area.  Behavioral  Activities  i..,as
                     subse2quently established as an Agency R&D subelement.  Under this
                     subelement three Agency R&D projects were established:  StreEs
                     Measurement and InterDretation, Behavioral Control, and liuman Factors.
                     In 1970 these R&-@i) projects were revised and increased in nwn7oer  Lo
                     accommodate the enlarged  scope  of  Divisional  activities.  These  n2ew
                     Agency R&D  projects  were:  Performance  Measurement,  Assessment  and
                     Selection,      n Factors, and l@liaterials Aiialysis. In 1972 an  addi-
                     tional R&-.D project entitled Narcotics Kouse was added;
                           2.  The term Behavioral Activities is defined as those activities
                     concerned with huran performance, reliability, and control.  In tg=2-ncy
                     terms Behavioral Activities addresses problems concerned with personnel
                     security, assessment,  health,  performance,  protection,  and  control.
                     These problems apply to individuals, groups, and organizations or
                     institutions.
                           3.           )is addressing these problem areas as follows:
                                Personnel Security                  )Research
   2                                                                 iprogram
                                Personnel Assessment       Speech Research
                                                           Monotony/Isolation Research
                                                           Asp?ssment Validation
                                                              @llrogram
                                                                    lprogram
            2                                               Personality  &  Behavioral  Scales
                                Personnel Health                   lprogram
                                                               Program
                                 Personnel Performance     Training '-Research
                                                           Analytic Models
                                                           Predictive Models
                        7                                   Software Programs
                                 "@lersomel Protection     Materials Pnalysis
                                                           Drug Abuse

                                Personnel Control     E-ioked     [Potentials
                                                                IForeign Cultures
                               Although          lis "addressing" the  problem  areas  listed
                      above, there are distinct gaps  and  =issions  in  the  program.  These
                      are:
                                a.  The recently initiated          .)Program cannot be
            2               funded beyond FY 72 without serious revisions and  cutbac'zzs  in
                           other  Behavioral  Activities  programs.
                                b.  The exploration and development of new personality
                           scales has remained essentially stationary  because  of  lack  of
                           funds and staff  ersonn el. Partial  exceptions  have  been  the
                              land'monot     scales.
               2                 c. In the past, trainini research  has  yielded  Dosi'Llive
                           results.      !has approached          @with  new  requirements.-
                           it is expected that these will be  formalized  and  forwarded  to
                                 The current Behavioral Activities  budget  does  not  have
                           funds available for this work.
                                d.          2                                    6ffectiveness
                           in foreign cultures have  been on the  boo s for many years.
                           No work has been done in  these areas  because of lack  of  funds
                           and personnel.  One small effort in                  )is   planned
                           for this year.  Follcn.7-on funding and personnel &re still
                           inadequate2.
                           5.  In addition to the above,       !believes  that  considerably
                      more work needs to be done in the 'areas of decision theory,-Dred4-ctive
                      modeling, and operations research. The same  is  true  in  the  areas
                      of prisoner exploitation, agent assessment and recruitment d@,n=ics,
                      and psychological evaluation of certain foreign grou-os  such  as  the
2
                           6.       lbelieves that the Behavioral Activities  area  needs  to
                      be re-evalua"u-ed and upgraded in staff and dollars.  There are no
                      serious day-to-day problems  confronting  the  Division.  Past  policy
                      on reouirements has been an im-oediment at times.  Hooefully, present
                      policy will correct this barrier to needed research whenever it
                     6 appears to be arbitrarily applied.
                           7.  Achievements.
                                a.  Established Derfol-mance levL.Is of the current
                           system.
                                b.  Determined the hwan factors aspect of a
                                                       2

                                                                          Blow
                               c.  Developed a prototype
                               d.  Developed an experimental all-electronic
                          instrtunent.
                               6.  Developed a(
                          channel without addit7i-onal sensor.
                               f.. Developed a prototype
                                 Im2onitor capable of detecting
                          signgl-s at distances pf 12 to 15 feef-.-
                               9.  Develo-oed arL gxperimental'
                                      imonitor capable of detectingt
                               isigndls.                                .]at free-
                          space distances of 100 feet plus.
                                             I - 2                         -
                               h.  A multiple   lassembly was designed for group
                          interrogation.
                               i.  Conducted a training system survey resulting in an
                          in-house capability to produce proc-ram aided (PA.1) courses of
                                                           m
                          instruction.  Funded a PAI-course in2 Vietnamese language.
                                  Delivered the original and many updated versions of
                          the,..,-  Icom@-outer package for the m=-dical and social sciences.
                               k.  Funded with      @a computer model for predicting
                          epidemics of meningi@i@s'.
                               1.  Adapted Bayesian aralysis strategy to the intelligence
           2               analyst's problem of forecasting.
                               m.  Developed a he@:lth hazard radiometer for measuring
                          microi-7ave fields.
                               n.  Acqui-red and develoded a large data base on potentially
                          dangerous psychorha--macological agents.
                               o4  Developed a conceptual design for a
                          3    predictive system.

                                                 HISTORY
                       The,                              I'Divisi
                                                                OIL.
                  established in Tune 1965.  The creation of this Division, and the
                                                                       Division@
                  simultaneous establishment 6.t the
                  was brought 2about as a resuli 6f the growing complexity and rapidly
                  expanding diversity of their parent organization
                  The                                                            During
                                             lexisted from 1963 until June 1965.
                  this time this group initiated a wide variety of priority research
                  tasks which were representative of life science disciplines ranging from
                  hum2an psychology and decision theory  to  biological  sub-systems  such  as
                  microinmunology and particle physics.  Because of this exaggerated
                  diversity, it was believed.'that a di-vision of life science activities
                  into separate but closely coordinated working groups responsible for
                  behavioral activities and for biological activities would be more
                  efficient and productive.  Accordingly the
        2          Di-visict4l@Ipwas established and tasked with the primary responsibility
                  of cari-,,ing out research and develorment operations in support of intelligence
                  requirements in  the  behavioral  activities  area.  Behavioral  Activities
                  was therefore established as an Agency Research and Development Sub-element.
                  Under this Sub-element, three Agency R&D Projects were est3ablished.  These-4
                  were (a) stress Measurement and Interpretation, (b) Behaviort-Control.,
                  and (c) Human Factors.
                       The initial                               .[Division  consisted  of
                  a Division Chief, four technical officers and one secretary.  Professional
                  disciplines represented were:  one Medical Doctor, one Ph.D. Physiologist,

                    two Ph.D. Psychologists and one Pharmacologist.  During the period
                    June 1966 to April 1968 the Pharmacologist resigned., a Ph.D.
                    Physiologist with a background in pharmacology join@ed the Divtsion
                    staff and one secretary was added bringing the Division c=plement
                    to seven.
                        Research projects initiated by the                       and
       2             continued by the                                 idivision were: polygraph
                    p3@ogram, stress measurement support, baseline stress measurements,
                    vulnerabilities of special behavioral groups., hypnotic susceptibility
                    and biological effects of                                   With the
                    exception of the polygraph'and baseline stress measurement  studies, these
                    initial proje2cts were subsequently redirected or discontinued.  Stress
                    measurement support and biological effects
                              iwere discontinued, the latter responsibility going to the
                    Department of Defense.  The vulnerabilities of special behavioral groups
                    effort was redirected to a study--of undercover agent characteristics,
                    con men, and provocation, elicitation, interrogation techniques while
          2          the hypnotic susceptibility work was redirected to a study of sleep
                    suggestibility.  Meanwhile the Stress Measurement Project was expanded
                    to  include
                                                                            and the polygraph
                    program was enlarged from           _._.Iresearch contracts.  This latter
                                                                             'Ithat performed0
                    effort was coordinated and'directed by a team within
                    most of the data analysis and that prepared and published reports of
                    polygraph program developments.  The Behavior Control Project was expanded
                    to include a drug acquisition and screening program, exploratory and
                    developmental work on techniques for improved

                  assessment of individuals and small groups, work on covert provocation
                  and elicitation techniques and new efforts in the area of ethnocultural
                  factors concerned with communication barriers within and betweerr
                  selected cultural groups., national issues and tribal issues among
                  nomads and other minority groups.  The Human Factors Project has
                  developed during the period2 June 1965 to April 196@ to include a  co-
                  ordinated multi-task effort to improve                  performance in
                  targei detection,-to improve                 iperformance2 to improve
                  performance of the Agency training system,, to analyse and define the
                  role or transfer functions of the human in the intelligence process
                  and to develop means of opti2mizing his performance with particular.
                  emphasis to date on the intelligence analyst and the decision  making
                  process, and to identify and exploit factors influencing learning@
                  memory., and fatigue.
                       Starting in June 1965 with a budget of       and a program of
                                            968 the                                 Division
                       ,projects, in April 1
        2          had established.                        pontracts
                          leantracts amounting to
                       In spite of the s-mq-l I size of the.
                            during this developmental phase its officer  personnel  were
                  successfully monitoring two projects for other                    -ing
                                                                    )Divisions, serv
                  as consultants on three Depart2ment of Defense committees, and as
                  consultants to various Agency components or activities.          sonnel,,
                                                                               Iper
                  both as a group and as individuals were actively involved in a
                  collaborative effort with other Agency components to identify  Agency
                  problems and related requirements.  With the office of
                       1  lthese relationships centered about the polygraph program and the

                 training systems study, both of which were carried forward with the
                 assistance of outside contractdrs,  With the Office of
                                  ",initiated research to identify problems associated
                 with the role of the intelligence analyst.      initiated work with
                                          to better define problems associated with
                 assessment of individuals and groups.
                     ks 2a result of these efforts problems of access and of cooperatim
                 between offices based on habits and established practices have been
                 largely overccme.  The principal example of progress in this area was
                 the polygraph program jointly undertaken by the
                 This example setting effort, along with the training system survey, has
                 gone a long way toward establishing precedence for future cooperati2ve
                 efforts between     tand other Agency cmpcnents.  It is expected that
                 the current method enp;oyed bZf     of establishing procedures for the
                 identification of Agency problems will be the first step toward a
                 definition of the various human roies in the intelligence analysis process.
                      Immediate plans of the'                               iDivision
                 inclu2de a moderate growth in per sonnel and funds to co-mplete the work
                 now under way and to support new work needed in the Stress Measurement.,
                 Behavior Control and Human Factors areas.  It is also planned to increase
                 the in-house effort with respect to the ongoing analysis of Agency problems.
                 At the same time it is planned to systematize and adapt special analytical
                 techniques, Bayesian, contextual7 and others to the Agency's peculiar
                 problems and to implement their use as appropriate.

                        Long range plans call for careful analytical studies and
                   preparations for the probable needs of the Agency in the years. to come.
                   If predictors for example indicate that human group behavior iito
                   become increasingly more emotional and violent for the foreseeable
                   future, requirements concerning the struggle for men's minds could   change
                   radically.  To survive and s2ucceed in a rapidly changing world it may
                   be that the Agency will have to have some means of instant self analysis
                   of any one or more of its various components and a means of quickly
                   instituting changes as needed.
                        At this point in time a number of accomplishments may be  cited  as
                   milestones toward the achievment of established goals:
                         (a) Polygraph program2 results have yielded findings  with  respect
                   to polygraph utility, reliability and validity.
                         (b) Automatic measurement of polygraph signals  was  accomplished.
                   The method could be used to assist the examiner.
                         (e) An  inproved   'Idesign was developed and demonstrated.
                         (d) An  improved            lsensor was developed.  The improved
      2             design has yet  to  be 8PTn nstrated as superior in operation.
                         (e) An  immroved             sensor is under develol=ent.
                             A                     isensor is under development.
                         (g) The      was slhown to be a sensitive indicator of stress.
                         (h) The      was shown to be a sensitive indicator of "yes" end
                     no" answers a1nd hence potentially an indicator of deception.
                         (i) Three new stress indicators,
                                                                  were investigated and
                   discarded as potential polygraph parameters.

                       (j) Significant new developments in
                  monitoring were identified and redirected for Agency application.
                       (k) Sleep suggestibility as distinct from hypnotic suggestibility
                  was demonstrated as a phenomenon.
                       (1) Some characteristics of individuals more successful in
                  resisting                         /were identified.
                       (m) Methods that             to identify susceptible targets were
                  studied and classified.
                       (n) Two first operation health hazard radiometers were'developed
                  and deployed to the field.
                       (o) A dosemetry slide-rule for safe operation of
                  was developed and disseminated to users.
                       (p) Preliminax7 design specification were developed7 for a system
                  to determine critical parameters in                  idetection of targets.

