                                      -- --------------- - - ---------------------- -
                    To: ;Files
                    Subject:  SI and If Experimentation (21 September 1951).
                         On Frid!@Ly, 21 Septet@r        th,@@17.il er  conducted  an  experi-
                    ment using SI and H wi Li                   --  This  experiment   was
                    conducted in Room 20, Du
  2                       The,purpose of this  experiment was  to  determine  wilether  a
                    post hypnotic would operate  effectively  upon  the  subject  and  to
                    see if amnesia could be created in the subject.
                         An SI state was induced into the subject, at which-time, she
                    was told that each and every  time  the  writer  stroked  his  hair  she
                    wouj-d immediately go into a deep 2sleep.  Subject was further told
                        caild resist and fifht this post hypnotic as much as she       cared
                    she
                    to. After the subject  was  awakened,  the  writer  stroked'fiis  hair
                    and the subject went into  a  deep  sleep.  The  subject  was  again
                    awake@ned and again a deep sleep was induced  by  the  same  methocr
                    The subject was reawakened a2nd siihseqtiently indticed  into  a  deep
                    sleep by the post hypnotic  gesture  a  total  of  three  times.  Each
                    and every time the subject stated  she  would  try  and  resist,  but
                    could not help hersel-f.
                         A state of SI was  induced in the subject and    the writer
                    queried the subjedt regarding her first             her.   The   subject
                    replied that2 her first-.year teacher wa                     The   writer
                    then told the subject she would have  c  15let@7'@i@hesia  upon  awaken-
                    ing. When the subject was  awakened,  she  was  asked  if  she  remem-
                    bered anythina that had occurred while  she  had  been  under  the  SI
                    state.  The subject replied that  she  did  not  remember  anytiiing.
              2      'The subject.wa!3 then told that she had stated that her first-year
                                                  d wit
                    teacher was                        h this  jog  of,memory,  she  did
                    recall-that  she @ai @@i@s while under SI.
                    i    On  21i -September 1951, the subj@ct stated that  until.this
                      port was  dietateds she did not remem0ber anything    that   happened
                    re
                    under  the SI state, i.e.@the sequence.of the    events that   tran-
                                 under the@SI state.@
                A
                                      4-
                                         ftr
                    4
                                             ff, Pt

