                       Agilk                                                      fib
                                                 M BACKSTER EFFEM
                                            since 1966 (1-4), presented to the  lay and scientific
                  Mr. Cleve Backster hasp
                  covmunity claims that a   larse variety of living materials  (primarily p2lants$
                  but also including hen's  eggs, PGT&Mclum, ameba. mold cultures, scraping$
                                                                             characteristic Slec-
                  from the roof of a human couth, and ye*st) will product
                                                                   chine.  The signals obtaine(so
                  trical signals kten2 connected to a polygraph ma
                                 to opinion, closely resemble the outputs    seen when human beings
                  in Mr. Backeter
                                                                                            not  sur-
                                            5,  That Such@signals art indeed produced is
                  undergo lie deteztor test
                              2                                            tion that they result
                               c is unexpected Is Mr. Bac'keter's conten
                  prising.  Who
                  from the perception capabilities of the materials.
                  The processes of life are such that in living systems a large variety of con-
                  ditions exist which give rise to electrical charge separations with attend=t
                           2                                                            e salt con-
                  electrical potentials.  These potentials or* interconnected by th
          4       taining fluids of living systems which in turn are cont&ined In materials
          1
                  having diversified electrical properties.  The result to an extremely couplicated
                                                5 of a multiplicity of par2allel and ser4.es connected
                  electrical  circuit   consistln
                  potentials, resistances, capacitances, and reactances.      Thus, if current flow
                  in such a system to monitored by connecting it to a psycho-inte-Oror-      ter (II*
                  detector) one should not be surprised to see a large variety 2of current changes
                  m=y of which will resemble typical polygraph outputs.  A multitude of seemingly
          r,      Insignificant events tan conceivably change t'4e impedance or such a circuit
                  through their Enfluence on the resistance, capacitance, reactance or potential
                  generating characteristics of the system.  lot example. a change in the position
          r
                  or stren2gth of any nearby electrical or magnetic field can Induce a voltage
                  in a critical part of the circuit which will result in a large change in the
                  current flow as read by the attached ammecer. Such changes can be broughc
                  about by the mere repositioning of the observer's body or motiolm of his limbo.
                  Likewise, small changes in the chemical makeup of the system due to such I.hiftgs
                  as ad3sorption of odors or water vapor can appreciably change the resistance
                  or capacitance of the system uhich will change the matching characteristics
          -4

                                                                                Ask
                        Adak
                                                                      rise to ixopedance mis-
                                                 4 the circuit giviltg
                     betwecn the readout anveter an
                                                                 In additl*n, the internal en,
   2                  matches and a consequent change in readout.
                                                                              ge due to tell
                     vivorawnt of a living system is constantly underooin- chan
           Jr        division, elongation, and maturation.  These changes may also alter the
                     impedance and voltage generating characteristics of t%
                                                                  2       _a living system and
                     result in a variety of changes in the current readout.
                                                           ch have been induced at a  distance  of
                     Figure 1 shows some voltage changes whi
                     meter in a human hair (stretched between tva platinum electrodes and made
                     to be semiconducting by coating it with $12,cerol and a liquid soap) by a
                     vibrating barium titanate crystal. It is evident that the  vibrating  crystal
                     tndu,ces a voltage in the hair preparation ,which is related to the first deriva-
                     tive of the frequency of the vibration and therefore, it is probably a reflec-
                     tion of the change in the electric field at the barium titanate crystal.  Since
                     the hair preparation is derived entirely from materials found in living
                     systems and its structure is due largely to the hair (a former living material)
                     it is reasonable to expect that tblis preparation has an equivalent electrical
                     circuit which resembles, in ftany ways. that found in living tissues.  This,
                     if voltage changes can be induced in this preparation, there is reason to exp2ect
                     that they can also be inducea in living systems.
                     There seems to be no reason to doubt Mr. Backster's observations of polygraph
                     readouts from a variety of living materials.  On the tther hand, his explann-
                     tion for these observations warrant some c    nts. F@@ny of  the  experiments
                     wbich Mr. Backeter has conducted appear to lack adequa2te controls and almost
                     all of his explanations or implied explanations for the results are  at  beat
                     impulsive.  He conclude$ that his readouts are the result of single cell ac-
                     tivlties and, therefore, possessed by all living systems.  However, his expert-
                     ments are of@en designed to show a one to one correspondence between a poly-
                     graph readout and a specific event w6bich is really only one example of a con-
                     stantly occurring phenomenon.  For example, in order to show that plants are
                     sensitive co the death of other organisms, even at a distance, he dumps brine
                     shrimp int* boiling water and obser-ves the polygrapk responses of plants
                                                             2

                  located in another room. But if, as he purports, this  experimert  shows  that
                  plants are sensitive to the death of other organisms, -dhy are the plants
                  3tuned only to the death of thcsa pirticular or&anisms?  Certainly, there are
                  millions of microorgantsm3 dying in the same room with the plmits  and  un-
     2             doubtedly a number of household pests such as ants. flies, and the  like  are
                  also dying in various parts of the bouso not to mention the variety  of  fresh
                  vegetables and meats being prepared in the  neighborhood  kitchens.  Likewise,
                                                                 teleoloeical
                                   a marked tendency to look for Wi*14tfd*l  explanations  for
      2            W. Backater haa
                  his work. He always relates his polygraph patterns to. psychic  or  physical
                  phenotwna seen in human beings; i.e., emotional stimulation, "fainting
                  heartbeat, nervousness, even prayer. This is a basic error  which  can  mask
                  and distort the p*ssibility that the observed phenomen-a can be used for  useful
                  and perhaps unique purposes. It is -.tot2 necessary to resort co  explanations
                  which transcend the physical laws we know now. An approach  which  seeks  to
                  Interpret the results within tie framework of known phenomena will  be  far
                  more useful. Consider the possibility that the house  plant,  for  example,
                  acts not only as a biased electrical circuit, but alsa functions as  a  high
                  impedance antenna. Such a system can be disturbed by changes  in  2small  elee-
                     cal fields, perhaps even of the magnitude produced by brain waves  and  blood
                  tri
                                              c
                  circulation. After all devi es are available that can detect  at  a  distance
                  magnetic fields generated by  blood circulation and brain waves  (5-6).  Also,
                  the surface area of a plant Is qui2te large and well adapted to  gas  exchange
                  reactions so that trace amunt-i of chemicals emitced from anir@als can be
                  absorbed.by the plant and lead to pronounced changes In plants and  their  elec-
                  trical circuitry. For example, plants change their  metabolis=  and  undergo
                  leaf epinasty in response to a concentration of ethylene of as little  as  0.002
                  uicroliters per liter o2f air (7-8).  The events triggered by conscious or un-
                  conscious nervous reactions (odor emission, increase in heart rate, change in
                  brain wave pattern, etc.) on the part of an observer, which  go  undetected
                  by him, could conceivably cause changes in delicately  balanced  electrical
                  circuits including those existing in living systems.  Under these circumstances,
                  the electrical readout from an instrumented 5plant could change  in  response
                                                           3

                    to the e=tional or physical state of an observer.  However. the response
                    would in no way be a case of the plant reading the individual's mind.  Rather,
                    it would be due to changes In the plants environment  brought  about  by  the  ob-
                    server and resulting in a  change in the electrical characteristics of a
                    delicately balanced system.
                   2 The poesibiltty that  very subtle changes In the  environment  alter  the  elec-
                    trical properties of  plant tissues is not unreasonable.  Such changes aze
                    everyday  pheiomena  In animal sensory organs and  the  strmctures  and  electrical
                    status of  plant  cells have many features In  co=on  wi,.h  nervous  tissue.  The
            -Z      most essential difference may actually be in  the  organization  of  tne  cells.
                    In the animal, the cells are arranged to provide quic'4 reaction times,
                    centralized Information depositor-y &,ad specialized Information sorting to-
                      ther with feedback and compensatory reactions.    In the plant,  on  the  other
                    h=d, the cells are not organized In this mariner and although their electrical
                    2properties may chainge with the@-,environment, the phenomenon is of  I.Udtad  use
                    to the plant. However, if man monitors these  ele4:trical  changeb,  he  may  be
                    able to correlate them with subtle changes in  e-nvironmencal  factors  which  are
                    of intezest to him much in the same way that the receptor potentials of various
                    nervous tiss-aes2 (visual, olfactory, tactLIe, etc.) caa be  used  to  supply  in-
                    formation on. for example, odor  concentration,  light  intensity,  and  pressure.
                    It Is suggested zhat a program be carried  out  to  investigate  the  possibility
                    that changes inthe electrical properties of plants are induced by subtle
                    changes In tie environment,  Necnodologieg which are similar to those now
                 5      d to expl:Dre receptor potentials in nervous tissues  orild  be  employed  and
                    the character.'Lstics of any signals observed correlated with such things as
                    trace amounts of adors itittoduced into the enviror@nent or uiinuce chaiiges  in
                    electrical and magnetic fields.
                                                              4

                                                                                                 oped
                                                               with Liquid potassium   Soap and  D
                    FIG=        Response of Huma@'Hair Coated
                                with Octanot.
                                In each case, trac'e A is the response f-roin the hair and  traca 3 is
         8                                                                                          The
                                a record of the signal driving  the  barium  ticanate  transducer
                                nuvbers.indicate the frequency  of  the  driving  signal.  TracesA
                                and B were made simultaneously with a dual  be@-in  oscilloscope.

                                                        AIKC
                      A *.IC
        z
                                                          A10KC
                      AIC
                       la
                                                         A SOKC
                      Aioc
                         r r r r r
                                                         A IOOKC
             8         AIOOC

          7
                    1.  Backster, C.  The Man Who Read Naturets Secret Sipals.  National Wildlife.
                        February-i%iarch, 1969.
                                      Do Plant,% Think7  Science of Mind. 'June, 1969.
                    2.  Backster. C.
                    3.  Backster, C.  Evidence of a Prima" Perception In Plant Life.   International
           2             Journal of Parapsychology.  Vinter, 1968.
                        Backster, C
                                      Be Kind to Your PlaLuts - Else You Could Cause a Violet to
                    4.
                        Shrink.  Wall Street Journal.  About January, 1912.
                    S.  Rosen, A., et al.  Magnetic Ratording of the Eeart's Electrical Acitivity
                        with a Cryogenic liagnetometer.  TRW System Group, Redondo Beach, California.
                        NIH Report No. 69-2243, June 26, 1970.
                    6.  Cohen, D.  E. A. Edelsack and J. E. Zink rman.  Applied Physics Letters 16:278,
                        1970.
                    7.  Leather, C. R., L. E. Fo'"ence, P. 0. Abeles.  Increased Ethylene Production
                        during Chemostat Ex-peri1ments May Cause I"eaf Epinasty.  Plant Pbystology
                        49:183-186. 1972.
                    8.  Reid, M. S. and H. K. Prate.  Effects of Ethylene on Potato Tuber Respiration.
                        Plant P4'ysiology A9:252-255. 1972.

