               1. Summary of Progress
                      A comprehensive series of runs involving a variety of electrodermal and other
               physiological measures has been completed on a population of 26 subjects under a
               variety of task conditions and contrived psychological "sets" to assess the relative
               sensitivity and reliability of various electrodermal measures, including the recovery
               limb time constant. Assessment o2f impulsivity and anxiety by psychological tests as
               well-as a psychomotor test of fnhi ition have been obtained on the subjects. Data analysis
               is still in progress, but some preliminary conclusions have already been drawn and
               are reported here as an interim progress note. Runs on a separate por)ulation of
               twenty subjects under a -different set of stimulus concutions have been used to examine
               the 2dependence of recovery limb time constant upon base conductance level and response
               amplitude. The initial study of the vascular compcnent in the sl-,In potential response
               has been completed. Develot)ment of the automatic measurement of recovery limb
               time constant has progressed to the point at which a system is now available, using
               first derivatives, which overcome many of the di2fficulties of the earlier appro@, ch in
               N,vhich second derivatives were employed. The new system has been used to print out
               the time constants for 22 subjects whose data had been stored on magnetic tape. These
               data are now being subjected to statistical evaluation.
               11. '@'tudv of Characteristics of Recoverv Limb in Rela,'Uion to Oth--r Electrodermal
                   h,leasures
                       a. Der)--nde,,ice of Recovery Limb Time Constant on Base Level.
                       To determine whether the apparent relatl-ior of recover@,- limb to nature of the
               stimulus condition was to be explained by diff--rences in base resistance level, compe-risons
                                                                        Approved for Releas3
                                                                        Date

                                                                                                       2
             N,;ere made between base level and recover,
                                                           .; lirb time constan" for 21 subjects in
             two conditions, each of which caused activation and consequent decrease in base
             resistance, but with different degrees of goal oriented task demands.
                    2 Mean,,, for the two situations were as follonvs:
                                                  BackNvard
                                                  Countiag
             Condition                                 ven.-,)                     Cold Pressor
             Average time constan@.'
                 (scale units)                      17. 1                               21.7
             Average base resist.,.ace
                 level                             29. 5 K                              27.6 K
                     7bese de-ta indicate tl,.at despi-Le the fact that the cold pressor task was, If
             anythin.,-,, -cli,,Yh*,Iy more activating (dffference in level not statistically si,,mLficant) the
             time constants v.,ere sig,2-.ifican,,Iy differeat (p < .01., paired comporison), tvie difference
             is therefore not r-ttributable to difference in base level.
                     It- ic to be expected, however, th.,,t subjects v.,ho shom -,reater activatioa for
             p--r.lormance of a task migh,, show a refle--',,ioa of this'mob,.I2ization both in base level
             and in recovery limb time constant.  AccordLi.-ly the co@--elation betyieer. base cor--
             ductance and rime constant was determined for this same grcup ol' subjects during the
             bact,-ward countilg tas!c, and it showed a signii@ica,,-t rela-tiorship (--r = -.49. r, 05).
             -7or the cold pressor si;'Iiation where the --c-.ivation is presumed to be of a different
             quality, the co-rreL--tion was consideralily lesn (r = -.4'3, @'.S.)

                                                                                                  3
                      b. Dependence of r-,ecovery Limb  Time  Constant  on  Response  Amplitude
                       Although the time constant of an exponential decay should, if properly measured,
                  be independent of amplitude of the curve, there are many conceivable reasons for
                  suspecting that such may not be the case for the electrodermal response. Accordingl2y
                  for each of 12 subjects, time constants were compared with peak amplitudes (con-
                  ductance change) for 30 sequential responses talen across four experimenw.1
                  conditions (rest, perceptual task, cognitive task, perceptual-motor task). The
                  Pearson's correlation--, are shown below:
                  Subiect                Pearsor.'s r          Si-ibiects                Pearson's r
           2       1                           .29                7                            -.04
                  2                           .29                8                            .14
                  3                           .06                9                            -.04
                  4                             43               10                           .03
                  5                           -.25               11     2                      -.06
                  6                           .15                12                           .00
                        Tne inderendence of these two measures is well demonstrated. Some n@-ga#,-ive
                                                                 I
                  correlations might be expected because demandiag tasks could produce higher responses
                  and also, 2because of the nature of the activation, shorter time constants. For most of
                  these subje--ts, 1-ioviever, such was clearly not the case.
                         c. Denendence of Recoverv Limb Time Cons,-,ant on Ouall@tv of Task
                         A study ivas u@-idertal-,en to answer t%vo cuestions.
                         1) IDoes the recovc--y limb vary as a funct'lon of the p--rceptual, cognitive,

                                                                                                   4
               or motor aspects of a task.
                      2) If it does so, how does its specificity and sensitivity compare vtith
               those of more conventional methods.
               A. Method
                      Twenty-six subjects were used in an experiment in which three tasks were
               performed, alon,,-, with associated rest periods.2  In order to exclude the variance
               known to be due to the operator's mode of instruction and his relation to the subject,
               the tasks were programmed on video tape.
                      1. Cognitive
                      Each of a series of 12 Ravens Matrices Problems was presented for 30 seconds
               followed by a 15 second rest period. Tne subject was to choose the pattern which
               properly completed the matrix2 and was to report only after the given problem dir,-
               appeared from tiie screen. Responses were chosen only from thd period in which he
               was solving the problem. Obviously, contLmL-i-Lints such as visual perception, frustra-
               tioa, etc., were present, but it was hoped ttiat the group result as a whole would be
               heavily wei&,Iited by the cognitive performance factor.
          2            2.  Percen' ,,lal
                      A fixed pattern remained on the screen for three minutes. At random intervals
               during this perlod, il@. would disappear, momentarily (40 msec) and for a total of IS
               times. The subject was to continuously obser,,,e the pattern and after the end of this
               task, upon command, report the number of disaopearances. All us8eable resoonses
               d,,lring the observation period were am. l@,zed.

                                                                                                    5
                  3.  Reaction Time
                  A series of five reaction time trials was used, cacti having a warning signal
          arid a 10 second foreperiod.  hicasures were taken -at the time of the reaction key
          press.
                  4.  Other Measures
                  a) Beb-cvior2al.   ln v ddition to the ,-bove, two psychological tests were
          administered to these subjects, the &-irrett Impulsivity Scale and the Spielberger
          Tr--it Anxiet@,, Scale. A behaviorl,.l test of motor inhibitl-ion task- .@,as a'L--o administered.
          In this                     a-irLveatig=r, "-.the subject i.,3 told to turn a knob through
          2180 degrees, continuously, but as slowly as he can.  Inhibi,6ion is assessed by    the total
          time taken and by the degree to which ,-,-te is accelerated as t@le task progresses.
                  b) Phvsiological.  In addition to the skir- conductance measure, skin potential,
          c@, rdiotachometer recorcling, resdiration (mechanical pr.--u,-ro6-raph2 only) and -frank
          perspiration were meas=-ed.  The last measure was obtained bv a mod:L4icaticn of the
          photoelectric p--i.-@m method previously described.  The device has been improved to
          eliminate vasomator artifacts and to allow use of a lightweight unit secured to the
          .inz--r tip.
                  ]During-the-azove-a:uns-;--test-s-were,run2-on-24 of -the subjects toidete--mine t e
          4
          serisit@v,.'                                                                             )nal
                   ,,tyo-.I,thq;recov,-ry limb time constant for-detecting sLybtle-c@.ang,-.s-of emoti(
                                              test was adopted for th,:-- purpose and
          c 2e-@-                                                                      ;-,,,,cs used-undel-@
          three@-differe-.it-derr,@-nd-situations-.- The, use of vit-@co tape was again hclp-.@"u'l'ln-"r'ed-u-'ciag,
                                                         v;az presented.four let:,,ers andasked to
                 5                                                                            - - --------------

                                                                                                                     6
                  choose one and v.,ritc it dov.-n, to  be  turned  in  actcr  the  task-  was  over.  lie  was  then
                  presented a screen in N,.,hich these four letters appeared in a new order, the group
                  being preceded by three other lettcrs and 2folio%ved by three more.  An arrow                          I
                  ppeared and pointed to the first letter where It paused for 15 seco                  It then moved
                  a
             i    on to the next in the sequence and again paused for 15 seconds, etc.  The subject
                  @mc,,v in advance that this would happen in regular sequence.           In  the  first  such  test,
        2          the subject was to simply observe this sequence without any v--rbal report.  In the
                      nd test, the   identical sequence
                  seco'
                                                                                        La  a  third  series  run  on
                  13 of these 24 subjects,    the suli.)Jcct was told tli-,t he -,vould earn an extra   dollar  if  he
                  managed2 to successfLlly7
                                                                             An entirely new series and new
                                  .@were used.  At  the'end  of  tL-e  previous  two  tests  he  had  been  told  the
                  operatorts conclusion as to v;h',-r-h'o,,' the  letters was                        This   time   his
                  se,,-" had been altered2 by his     knoviled-e of the operator s previous        success   and    by
                  the added incentive                                 APain he v;as to respond  no" to each letter.
                  B.  Results to Date
                           Analysis   of these data Is still in process,     but some early results may be
                  presented.  Follow-up progress reports viill be made as calculations are completed.
                  2         I   Data F-aneling
                           The tapes were made primarily so that Lnalysis            of  these   recor&-   could   be
                  m--de af-,er furtiic;r development of electronic techniques         for  calculation  cf  the   time
                  const--,nl@-.  This  development  went  on  as  a  p--rallel  e'kfort  durlig  completion  of   the
            9      above  series  of  runs  and  has  since  been  co-@nDleted.  The  t-,,-i)es  have  been  run   off

                                                                                                                      7
                                                                                              out by usc of first
              and the
                                                                                                       e'ach    subject
                                            N@eim and stand:,rcl deviations of responses for
              d-.rivativ@-I proccsc.L-I"Y.
                                                           calcul.,tcd In prei@?.,@-atio',l for t-
              under  each   task   coiidition   are   being                                      tests of diff crences
              betvicen coi,.dltions.  To d.,:@te calculations (.,n 12 0; t4c 26 subjccts have been completed.
                        2.  comiriariso,,i BetNt.,ccn Conditionr,
                        No comparigous acro33 subjects cau be            m   d,,- until all means ard star-&@rd
                d--vi?-'t'Lon,- have been calct,.L,,ted, but intr,,t-indivi2dual comparisons betvieen t@,sks
                h-@ve been r:.ade for -Iiose stibiects completed.        'o 11 ',7j2 rossible comparisons, only
                                                          "d signI.;ica,-cc.   L,,, 10 of the 11 su'3j--cts who
                3 reached sl&9"-ifir-ance;        aopro.,ch
                sho-,ved reaction time rezpo=,es, the time corstar@l, for this           tasi: was the  shor@-.e!3t  of
                the -hree tas"-."F-.o    conzistonl.- dif@ference appe----rs Letween the 'Cognitive and ,ierccptual
                rlsks for that part of th,-@ p^,,nula,-aO.-. completed.
                          Using the                                                   orrecti-y idertified tl-C con-
                                                                    Lhe op-arator c
                         le-,ter la the first .ex-ies for IS    of the 24 sab;ects.      @.Ioreover, Nvhe-. tl,.c subject
                                   to  2                    ibv. mon--ta--y  re,,,:ard, th-, operator i,,Ie,-A,,,if ic d it-
                 co=. ectly In 10.of th2 13 cases.        1,1 5instances,    the op-c!ra,,or   d  failed  to   identify
                 the letter in the first scr-A.--r-, but, iilien monem. rv--revia.-d v,,2as ad@dcd he correctly
                 ider--,ific-c! tLe r-ev@-      fo,@: 4 of these    i.L- i c ci--, .Tl,-@., comparison of
                                                      is note%vor-LIay zhat i:i soi-.,Ie tnsmn c--!: in v;ii@cii
                  Cl.)ii"uc,Lamcc aclivi@7 g-IY-c               results, tl-,c GP,-.1cal s-weat recordln,@, sho%,,,e%l@ a

                                                                                                          8
                        4.  Psvcholozical and Nvchomotor Tests
                        These tests will later be used as a basis for sorting the population into
                different types of physiological  responders.  To  date,  the  individual  impulsivity
                ratings on the Barrett Scale have been compared with  tile  time  taken  for  180 2 degree
                knob rotation. The co2@.-clation was unpredictably a positive one  for  the  26  subjects
                (r = .0'7. p <.05), i.e., individuals judged  more  impulsive  by  the  Barrett  Scale
                took longer to rotate the knob, indicating that the type  of  inhibition  measured  by
                the two tasks is different. Tile Barrett Scale was  also  demonstrated  to  give  ratings
                wh2ich were independent of  the  Spielberger  Anxiety  ratings.  Later  calculations  will
                examine the interaction of these scale ratings and physiological findings.
                III.  Study of a Posrible Vascular Comnonent in the Skin Potential Resnonse
                        This study, Involving tile effect of arti@riol or venous cuffs upon skin potential,
                has been completed on a total population of 242 subjects. Results are highly  sin,  if  I-
                cant and show tha,. the shifl in potential can be more easily demonstrated upon
                deflatio.n than upon inflation of the cuff, and that the p--la.-it-,r of this r)ost-deflation
                re-cponse differs according to the type of pressure cuf.L used.  For venous (engorging)
                cuffs (p = 60 min Hg) the r2esponse positive. For arteriol (occlusive) cuffs  (p  ---  180
                mm Hg) the post-de.flation response is negative.  The conclusion that these represent
                vasomotor adjustments is supported by a follow-up pilot study o-.i  the  local  potential
                responses reported earlie.-.  It had been concluded th,--t the slow component of this
                positive resr)onse to stre'.ch is o2f vascular origin. If so, it  should  be  demonstrable
                even whea tile epide--mis is penetrated.  M-icroelect.-odes were pushed through the
                epidermis until the negative porenf*ial fall prec-lpitously indicating penetralion  of
                the dermis.  After allowin- time for stnbilization. increase of pressure on the

                                                                                                         9
               electrode causes a  potential  variation.  These  experiments  must  be  refined  to
               eliminate the possibility of the "responses" being only a reflection of variations in
               tip potential or sweat gland activity.  If valid they will offer strong support for a
               vascular component in the sl,-in potential response.
               I2V.  Development of ALtomatic Svstem
                      Comparison of @-,-I&uer:, for recovery limb time constant obtained by template
               matching with those obtained by the use of first derivatives indicated the inter-
               changeability of these two methods.  The principle involved in the first derivative
               method is that the absolute steepness of the recovery  limb  is  a  measure  of  its
               time constant for responses of equal amplitude.  Responses of higher amplitude
               having the same time constant will have a greater absolute steepness to the recovery
               limb.  Hence the absolute slope of the recovery limb can be used as a measure of
               time constant if a correction for  ampl-,ude  is  made.  In  practice  the  simplest
               correction is to divide the amp'li-tude of 2the peak slope ('Lirst derivative) of the
               ascending limb by that of the recovery limb.  This ratio, plotted against the temolate
               readin,.-., gives a good line-ar relationship.
                       To accomplish this electronically, the derivatives are obtained by r
               differentiation and the output stored on capacitors with diode input so that per..k
    05          ,va
                                                                                                       10
                  two frequencies. The output is printed out upon command and the system reset.
                  At the same time as the above occurs, the value of the peal-, first derivative of the
                  ascending limb which is proportional to response amplitude is printed out after
                  measurement by a separate counter. Thus the response amplitude and re2covery
                  limb time coastant are measured in a single operition.  It is @resumed, ho%,iever,
                  that most facilities will not have the luxury of t%yo parallel voltage-to-frequency
                  converters and counters and, therefore, an analog division circuit is being tested.
                  In this system the two voltages to be divided a-re fed Into a diode division circuit
                  and the quo2tient, as a voll@.-ave.level is fed into an A -D conversion and printing unit.
                  This circuit is very simple, and as an alternative the output (proportional to time
                  coastant) can be written out on an o-!--dinary @,,@-nalog recorder. The system then approaches
                  practical utility.

