                                                                  Is May 1971
                       MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
                       SUBJECT: Trip Report,
                                                 Non-Lethal Personnel Ihcapacitation,
                                  Drs.
                           1. There was a. delay in full scale initiation of this work  by
                             --Ibecause of other uncompleted Agency assigm2-nents.  Inas-
                       much as future requirements for continuation o-; effort in this area
                       is uncerta" the temporary delay was in no    way detrimental to
                       the completion of a hardware system.            "lwill request a
                       no-cost extension to compensate for the decreased expenditure    rate
                       during the first three months of the contract.
                           Z.  The pu2rpose of the meeting was to reach agreement on the
                       future structure of the program. Although outstandingly competent
                       in the broad medical and allied sciences fieldo assigned
                       personnel were relatively naive in the general  area  of  personnel
                       incapacitation.  Such a, situation is not uareasonable since most of
                       the prior work in this area has been accomplished by eng2ineering
                       and ordnance experts with occasional  consultation  from  the  biological
                       sciences.  During the past several months -           /personnel have
                       had an opportunity to .c;aturate themselves with the pertinent  incapaci-
                       tation literature.  The present visit was an appropriate time to
                       determine the efficient use of funds and direction of  effort.  The
                       Proje2ct Officer had previously forwarded             I an outline of
                       possible program direction and they in  turn  had  prepared  a  suggested
                       program in terms of their particular capability.  The results of the
                       meetinn, resulted in a consensus of opinion  which  was  mutually  agree-
                              Without detailed elaboration, the agreed upon
                       at-le.                                                 zeneral principles
                       included:
                                 (a) The general flavor would remain as outlined in the
                            original proposal, i.e., the           @ effort in the total
                            program would be  pri;:arily  concerned  with  the  biomedical
                            aspects of long-range proyrams, as opposed to major parti-
                            cipation in QRC-type projects.
                    4               40

                              (b) Although literature evaluation and review will
                           continue, it will play a minor role in the total project.
                              (c) Primary effort will be devoted to the considera-
                           tion and evaluation of new concepts as opposed to refine-
                           ment or evaluation of data in the traditional categories of
                           impact, standard chem2ical, sound, and light systems of
                           incapacitation.  The search for new concepts will be
                           directed from'the "inside out" biomedical point of view
                           as opposed to most of the prior work which started with
                           ordnance, or some form of external energy and then asked
                           the question of "what eff ect,will this have on humans, it
                           In the present case, th2e starting point will be potential
                           vuinerability of physiological systems followed by the
                           question of possible ordnance or other hardware equip-
                           ment to accomplish the desired result.
                           3. Although                ---'-'Ipersonnel have several new
                       concepts under consideration, both they and the Project Officer are
                       0aware that a gamble on new ideas is a high-risk investment.

