                                                     August 30, 1973
                Dear,
                     Here is the first draft of the Sta+weriients of lfork
                znd Cost.  My secretary put this on     i's-.ationary because
                I forgot to mention to her that I was dictating for
                ano'L-Iher party.
                          would like to pitch to        when he visits
         2       late in September.  That might be worthwhile if you have
                a rather complete understanding of how he will address the
                scaling p-roblem I mentioned and Itave an opportunity to
                dry run his presentation.  Perhaps such a careful exposure.
                would be good for the project's viability.
                     See you soon.  Stay well and happy.
                                                   Sincerely,
                  4                                                              E@ IqD

                                                                          AMk
                                                 PHASE I
                             ESTII,IATITIG TIIE ERFECTIVE@IESS OF -=LE CTP IC
                        FIS[i' III DETECTIIIG FOREIGII OBJECTS AT A DISTAIICE
                          Perform psychophysiological @xperi'Ments       using     different
                    kinds 2of electric fish in restricted water         so as  to   esti-
                    mate their ability to identify the exis:ence         of foreign
                    objects  in  this  water  k@aking  inlo  account  ele!ctrica'l  dis-
                    continuities in@posed by the boundaries of that water and
                    -the  foreign  obects   placed   within   it.   Specifically,   con-
                    Sider  the  natural  fish  as  a  signal  cenera2tor   and   receptor
                    and  then  Lose  of  auxiliary  signals  which  replicate   the   fishes
                    signal@ and otlier si'gnals of specific interest.        Compute   the
                    expecte4  behavior  of  such  fish  in  open  ocean  or   fresh   waters
                    given typical boundary conditions with respect.to depth,
                    topology, inogeneity of thal     water, temperature, 2and so
                    forth.    Summarize these findings     in terms of  tiie  prospec-,.,ive
                    ability   of these fish to identify foreign objects in a
                    harbor or  other  natural  body  of  water  of  interest  ...  foreign
                    objects  such  as  small   submarines,   torpedoes,   scuba   divers
                    skin divers, and so forth,
                         'I-to-re explicitly,  deterriiiie  the  sensory  capability  of
                    individual  electric  fish  in  terms  of   their   ability   to'sense
                    the existence of foreian objects as a function of range,
                    fundamental area, volumetric displicenert, dif-11erential
                    @iscontinu'ity,  and  so  forth.  In  this  regard,  use  a  tank   of

                 viater ad justed to the temperature and electrolytic conditions
                 of presumed operational conditions.  Retain a fish near one
                 point and insert in the %iater various objects, discerning
                 the different beliavior of the fish as these ot)jects are
                 inserted concurrently monitoring the electrical field
                 within the i-iater.  From these results. calcijlate the es-
                 timated behavior of such a fish in detecting an object in
                 an infinite iiater dorain and large scale viaters with various
                 boundary conditions.

                                                                   IdaL
                                           PIIASE I I
                           DETERIlItlItIG TI[E @'AET)IODS USED BY ELECTRIC
                                 FISti FOR RAIIGIIIG AIID LOCA'TIO14
                         Perform detailed experiments wherein the particular
                    characterist2ics of electric fish are related to their
                    abilities @-iitti respect to ranging and location.  Particular
                    attention %iill be focused up-an the use of phased arrays of
                    receptors, the fish's ability to deterniine incremental
                    time lags in the signal, the estimated spectral.properties
                    of the signal, to modify the transmit*ued signal as a
                    reflectio6n of knoiqledge gained from previous receptions,
                    and so'forth.  Interpret these findings in terms of specific
                    schematics and data analysis required to synthesize models of
                    the fish's capability, nodels which w-ien reified vtould
                    provide signal advantage over the state of the art with
                    respect to such a target as described above.

                                           PHASE III
                     DESIGII OF EQUIPT-IEIIT SYSTERIS SUITABLE FOR REPL!CATII:G
                   ELECTRIC  FISH III TER@IS OF TARGETITIG FOREIGII OB%I@CTS
                        Design, fabricate and test experinantal apparatus
                  suitable for replicating the above referenced models.  Perform
                  expe?,ir.-ents k6-iith this apparatus so as tD improve its ability
                  in various regards.  @lake a specific co-nparison of this
                  capability to that of an electric fish and estimate the
                  utility of such an apparatus- in terms of opqrational
                  situations.

                STATEIIENT OF COST
                PHASE I - $          6 nonths
                PHASE II                year
                P[IASE III                year

