                                                  June 27, 1966
                   Dear
                            Today I inadvertently mailed a progress report to
                                       binding them in,their respective covers.
                   7j@!e@ report was sent with cover letter sign ed
                                    'Would you be kind enough to staple the front
                   and back co'vers which,. I have e9nclosed to_ the report.  The
                   report (two pages) was mailed tod bLy (June 27) via REGISTERED
                   MA IL.
                            Thank you.
                                                  Very truly yours,

                                                  June 27, 1966          ------------
                     Dear
                                Enclosed is a short ProLTress Report of our work
                     to date pursuantto
                                                   Very t   ly yours,
                                                          ru

                               FIRST PROGRESS REPORT
                                     June 27, 1966
                             Contract No.

                        SU'.',INIARY OF ACTIVITY TO THIS DATE
                        A.    An initial survey was made of research and development'in the
                              field of imola-.ited electronic devices and biological power
                              sources.
                              1.    Literature Consulted:
                                    Star Index and NASA Documents available at the
                                   2 depository
                                                               Biomedical Telemetrv, and
                                    The books  Bio relemetry
                                    Biomedical Sciences Instrumentation, v. 2
                                    Proceedings of latest biomedical engineering conferences
                                     The National Telemetering Conference in Boston, May 1966
                                     Sponsor supplied Science Information Ex2change Notices of
                                     Research Projects
                                     Transaction    Ariierican Society for Arti Lcia.'L Internal
                                     pS Lan s
                                2.   Individuals Consulted:@
                                     Dr.
                                      Dr.
                                      Dr.
                          B.     A list of conceivable methods of powe7r production was prepared
                                 based on the literature review and personal discussions.  It is
                                 planned to evaluate the possibilities of each method and to report
                                 on research in each area.  Quantitative power yield and problems
                                 specific to each method will be discussed. The list, still subject
                                 to modification, at present is as follows:

                                                  -2-
                              1.    Energy from LNeuromuscular potentials (EMG, EKG,
                                    Nerve Bundles
                              2.    Energy from Diffusion Potentials
                              3.    Energy from Natural DC Potentials
                               4.   Energy from Reduction-0.@idation Potentials
                         I.\IMEDIATE PLA.2NTS
                         A.    Several leading researchers.have been selected for telephone
                               inquiries in the near future.
                         B.    Present technology in semi-permeable membranes will be
                               reviewed.
                          C.   A review of the present state of the art in mercury batteries
                                and rechargeable nickel-cadmium batteries will be started
                                i1mmediately. This survey will allow a comparison of the
                                power available from bwelectric sources with conventional
                                batteries.

