                     TO.,. File
                     SUBJECT:  S
                                I and R Experimentation, 16 October 1951.
                          On Tuecday, 16 October 1951, Messrs                        a
                                 a d SI and H experiments wi@h!                      n
                                    as  subjects.
                          For some time it has been contemplated that moving pictures
            2         made of individuals both under SI and entering and reaching the SI
                     tate would be@valuable for clinical purposes.  It was, therefore,
                     agreed  to make certain tests during this session to determine what
                     kinds of cameras, lights, etc. would be necessary- for this type of
                     work..
                          Accordingly, after several brief inductions and simple post
                     hypnotics had been given, the ma2jor experiment of the evening was
                     carried out as follows:
                                Both              d                  ere induced  into a
                          deep SI  s              e                 ed to open their eyes
                          and appear "normal" and   move about  in the Operations Room.
                          Thereafter, they were both again returned into a sleep state
                          and awakened.
                          The se2cond part of the experiment consisted of both subjects
                     again being induced into a sleep state ahd again being returned to
                     a linormal" condition.  They were then instructed to walk from the
                     Operations Room into  the  laboratory  where  an  extensive  conversation
                     was carried on with both  subjects  and  where  certain  catalepsy  tests
                     were made.  Thereafter, both subjects were returned 2again in the
                     linormal" state to the Operations Room where they were placed in a
                     sleep state on the sofa.
                                       h s-  o3t  h-ygnotic-activity  is  somewhat  eccentric,
                     was  tien.  a ened.                       given a  simple  post  hypnotic
                     and  awakened.  Afteri@                completed the simple post
                   2  hypnotic suc  essfully  s3e@w@a@-retiirned to a sleep state and fully
                     awakened.  Total experiment took approximately 45 minute's during
                     which time both subjects were, for at least 40 minutes, in a
                     total SI state.
                     Technical Details
                           In order to test  technical equipment  necessary  to  produce  ade-
                     quate trainin0g  films,,or.films for clinical study, 16 mm.     Eastman

               Cine Kodaks were used.  An-analysis of available light was considered
               inadequate for perfection.  [lowever, owing to our limited facilities,
               it was decided to proceed as planned,  Using a tripod with a panhead
               and the'cameras mentioned.  Two hundred feet of 6uper XX film was
               used.  Such phenomena as rigidity of limbs, facial expressions, move-
               ments, and post hypnotic suggestions wer5e highlighted-- At this time
               it is impossi'ble to predict the results., but is is hoped that the
               knowledge gained will contribute toward the later filming of a com-
               plete course of procedure.
                                                  -2-

