      ArmuwLqD pow& t4*. 4*
              -e                        M        UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
       Offic Memoranetu
                                                                         'll  October  1949
                  0     ourity Branch                             PATE:
      To     , Chi f  So
        FLOM : Interrogation "Seamh Section
       SUBJECTI- Interrogation Coll2ectioiL Requirement
               Due to recent and continual advancements in'general interrogation pro-
           codure and in the use of technical interrogation &ids.. it  in-extromely  im-
           portant that this organization keep abreast to progrona being made throughout
           the entire -world& This information is ossentieLl in order that we  might  2keep
           our personnel izL the field vmll informbd as to what they might expect, in
           order that we might properly train personnel about to go overseas, in order
           that we might perfect countor measures in our research program and in order
           that we might be prepared to operatioiially use methods which, in  offectiveneess,
           are equal or superior to methods used by unfriendly countries*
         2      A very unfortun&be situation now exists in the field.  Each of the
           numerous intelligence organizations, contacted'during the recent overseas
           trip, was laboring under the false impression that  some  other  organization
           was handling the collection of interrogation  ihform-ition.  All  organizations
           felt that.there exists a great deal of interrogation infornatiori in the field.
           After G.S39mbling the over-all picture, it must be concluded that almot locr/.f
                                     advanced interro                                              imp-
           of information concerning                  gation is beini  neglected  complatelye
               It seems essential  that a collection requirement be  issued  covering  the
           field of general and advanced interrogati2on methods and the  suspected  use  of
           operational hypnosis and drugs by unfriendly countr,-es.. During  the  recent
           trip, it mu quite conclusively determined that the  Russians  and  Russian  domin-
           ated countries are making use of such advanced  interrogation  and  operational
           methods. Due to the lack of time and facilities.-'Only a small  amount  of  infor-
           mation regarding these used was2 collected.  Numa,:rous sources are available in
           the field tode-yo
               It is suggested that this office be authorized to issue a collection re-
           quirement setting forth the necessary  Essential  Elements  of  Inromation.  It
           is further requested that this office be-allowed to be the  recipient  of  such
           information and be allowed to revise and keep current the E.E.I.Is concerned.
                It is further suggested that until adequate specialists are    available
           in the ordinavr Agency chamels of evaluation, this office be allowed to
           evaluate and issue repor.to concerning such information*
                The importance of acquiring suoh'information  oa=ot  be  over  emphasized.
           It is this category of information which is need6ed iiumediately in conjunction
           with the formulation of plans for future research projects  of  this  offices
           establishment of Security Validation To=s, the  use  of  operational  hy-onosis
           and drugs,.and the establishment of an interrogation training and testing
           program*

