                                             PROPOSAL
                            PHYSIOLOGICAL i\IE- CI-IANIS,\,!S, ANALYSIS-, AND
                                 BE@IAVIORAL SIGNIFICANCE OF THE
                                    ELECTRODERIM.AL RESPONSE
                                               From
                                                               App4roved for T,@eleasa
                                                               Date

                Period of @%lork-
                    This proposal would cover one year of effort.
                Faciliti@s
                    This       described would be accomplislied in the same laboratories of the
                In addition to equipment described under that contract, there is now available an
                impedance bridge, a voltage to frequency converter, electronic counter and ratio
               2 detector, an eleven column printer, and an expanded digital logic system for
                on-line analysis.
                Amount of Support
                    An estimate of costs is attached.  Contractual financial arran,-ements are
                proidosed as exist under the current contract.
                ReiDorts
                    h is proposed that schedulino- of progress reports be continued on the same
                basis as described in
        9        Pri@-iciDal Investi,7,ator

                                  PI-IYSIOLOGIC@%L i\IECI-IANISNIS, ANALYSIS
                                   AND 13CI-iAVIORAL SIGNIFICi%iNCE- OF TI-IE,
                                          ELECTRODERMAL RI"SRON'SE
                I.  INTR\ODUCTION
                          Reference  is'made to the description of the background for this study
                and of the proposed work- as described under contracts
                initiated in June 1966 and                               a one year continuation
                of t,ie earlier contract.  Further reference is made to Interim Reports dated
                February 15, 1967 and October 25, 1967. The initial efforts were- directed toward
                a study of the physiological mechanisms underlying the electrodermal response
           2     i.n ai effort to provide a rational basis for quantitative treatment and interpretation
                of electrodermal measures. Tlaese findings provide evidence to support the
                conclusion that the electrodermal system is a tnvo-component system in which two
                                                                                     P-
                processes under autonomous control  sometimes function synergistically, sometimes
           2     independently.  Evidence for this was drawn from microelectrode observations on
                sweat ducts and areas between sweat ducts, obse@vation of potentials from the nail
                plate, the differential effects of aluminum and of sodium on the positive and negative
                potential waves, optical recording of a sweat reabsorption phenomenon and the
                association of this phenomenon with the positive wave and finally the behavior of3 a
                locally induced positive potential response.  From these and other pieces of evidence
                it I@.-as concluded that information re.-ardin(-, the activity of the second hypothesized
                co,-,,pone,it was to be found in the shape of the recovery lin-ib of the exosomatic

                                                         -2-
                   response, the speed of recovery increasing in accordance with such activity.
                   various methods were developed for the quantitative treatri@cnt of the time constant
                   of this recovery limb (it was treated as an exponential decay) and manual methods
                   were d@veloped for its measurements. Tests of th2e strength of this measure
                   revealed that it had an impressive capacity for discriminating states of activation
                   and application to a task. Moreover, it also was capable of distinguishing between
                   individuals having different behavioral patterns in a way far superior to amplitude
                   measures. These results were described in the last report (October 1967).
                            Since that report, efforts w2ere concentrated on three areas:
                            a)  Phvsiological:   Despite conflicting evidence, the likelihood that the
                   electrodermal response contains a component of vascular origin kept reappearing.
                   A study was consequently undertaken involving the application of venous cuffs
                   (for engorgement of surface vessels) and arterial cuffs (for generation of hypoxia)
                   to determine the nature of any local process incide2nt to the removal of@these conditions.
                   Great care was exercised to eliminate artifacts which might render results spurious.
                   The conclusion (P < . 0 1 in two separate comparisons) is that a local potential shift
                   attends the termination of either venous or arterial occlusion. Because of the
                   significance of this finding to electrodermal interpretation, these studies will be
                   pursued further.
         0                   b)    Measurement of the recoverv limb time constant:  Atteition was
                   given to those circumstances in which measurement of the time constant by template
                   is in part confounded by the superposition of one response upon the recovery lin-Lb
                   of another. A rationale was provided for the required correction in such measurements

                                                          -3-
                  and a validation obtained from mathematical dctcrminitions using measurements of
                  the derivatives.
                            An area given heavy empliasis was the automatic determination of the
                  recovel'y limb time constant. A satisfactory system was achieved in which the
               2   time constant is printed out on-line. The negative first derivative of the skin
                  conductance response is divided by tl-ie positive second derivative at a point 0.6
                  seconds after the peak of the primary wave. These results bear a very satisfactory
                  relation to those obtained by template measurement.
                            c)  Behavioral:    The characteristics of the recovery limb time constant
                  ha2ve been studied in a human population in an effort to determine their individual
                  specificity, their relationship to type of behavior in process, and their reliability
                  over repeated testing. Since the automatic system was not operational at the time
                  of these runs, data were obtained by template measurement. Runs on each of 12
                  subjects taken for five consecutive weeks and under eight different conditions
        2          showed that there were significant individual characteristic differences in the speed
                  of recovery, even though for any given individual the rank order of his recovery
                                                                                                                 f7
                  speeds under different experimental situations was similar to that of the group.
                  The change in time constant as a function of 8 different conditions w2as tested on a
                  population of 21 subjects with results substantiating the earlier report on 9- subjects.
                            Data on another population of 50 subjects were examined for the relationship
                  between the recovery limb time constant for a given individual and the time it took
                  his cutaneous vasoconstriction to recover (recovery half-time) after a stressful task.
                  The rationale for examining this r0elation was the important behavioral significance

                                                           -4-
                  believed to lie in the rate at which an individual can "throttle back" after mobilizing
                  to deal with an emergency. Surprisingly the shorter the time constant during the
                  task, the longer the time required for recovery from vasoconstriction (P  .01).
                  This may imply that subjects who are2 able to mobilize fully for a task (interpretation
                  of short time constant) remain mobilized longer after its cessation. Since subjects
                  with short time constants also showed better maintenance of an inhibitory set in a
                  Imob-turning task, it is possible that such individuals are characterized by higher
                  neuropl-lysiolo-ical inertia.
                            One of the tasks required of subjects in t2hese studies was to count backwards
                  from 500 as rapidly as pos@@le, by sevens. The total number span and number of
                  errors in a fixed time (2 minutes) were compared with the characteristic time
                  constant during this task. Shorter time constants were associated with faster
                  rates of calculation and fewer errors. It can thus be concluded that the electrodermal
                  recovery rate of an individual i2s not only predictive of his physiologic.@l performance
                  but (at least in this task) of motor and cognitive performance as well.
                  II.  PROPOSED INVESTIGATIONS
                            Although most of the effort proposed for an additional year of support
                  would be directed toward study of the electrodermal recovery limb as a behavioral
                  indicator, the recent results which suggest the involvement of a vascular comp5onent
                  point up the desirability of further effort in this area. The relative portion of
                  work devoted to these respective projects can be varied in accordance with the
                  preference of the contracting agency.

                           A.  Studies on the Electrociern-ial Recovery Lin-ib
                                1.  Extension of studies already under way will be pursued in order
                   to answer several procedural questions involved in the use'of the time constant
                   nic,isure.  These include:
                                      (a)  To what extent is the time constant of an individual
                   ch2aracteristic?  Can the same principles be applied to interpreting intra-individual
                   shifts in this measure for individuals having different "characteristic" recovery
                   rates?
                                            These questions will be answered by using an array of
                   stimuli which offer the least likelihood that the emotional or behavioral response
                   will be idiosyncratic. These stimuii will be such as to elicit prepara2tion for action
                   (e.g.  a simple reaction time effort), preparation for sensory intake (e.g.  a
                   perceptual task), or fear (e.g.  of electric shock due to "possible equipment
                   .Lailure").
                                       (b)  How does the behavior of the time constant relate to
                   that of other electrodermal indices and of othei autonomic measures. In all
                   cases during the projected stan2dardization study, measures of heart rate,
                   d.-,a-i-Lal plethysmograph, a skin potential and respiration will be obtained. Two
                   channels of F-M tape recording are presently available for storage of data for
                   later automatic analysis and it is proposed to set up an additional two channels
                   of low cost tape recording to complete the battery. Special purpose computation
                   will be performed 2RELE to any A-D conversion so that computation will require

                                                          -6-
                    only minimal computer time or iione-at-all. Analysis of covariance (to correct for
                    base level effects) and correlations of rank order concordance will.bc used to
                    answer questions of covariation.
                                 (c)   How does the predictive ability of isola.ted responses compare
                 2   N%,idi that of responses superimposed on the recovery limb of a preceding response
                    or on a drifting base-lhic?  Responses will be elicited either singly or in close
                    sequence by using either single stimuli or trains of stimuli. It is to be expected
                    that the time constants of a succession of responses to the same stimulus should
                    be relatively similar to that for an isolated stimulus of simila2r quality. The
                    corrections necessary to give such a population of responses the least variance
                    will be examined by automatic techniques.
                                  (d)  Can the time constant be automatically determined without the
                    use of the second derivative?  Although a clean record of the second derivative
                    may be easily obtained with the technique used at this laboratory, it has usually
                    been looked upon as difficult to achieve because of the enhancement of noise in-
                    such records. To give this system maximum operational feasibility, efforts will
                    be made to obtain the time constant measure with the first derivative alone.
                    1-7"'or.-s toward this end are under way and a possible solution is being examined.
                              2.  Behavioral Significance
                                  (a)  4 To what extent can an individual's characteristic time constant
                    be used to predict performance? Are there certain categories of performance for
                    which it is a better predictor than others. To what extent can the time constant
                    obtained under one stimulus situation be useful in predicting behavior or performance

                                                           -7-
                  in another situation. The answers to these questions will be  investigated  primarily
                  by physiological measurement during an array of  tasks  which  afford  samples  of
                  the individual's performance in different areas (psycliomotor, perceptual,
                  cognitive and combinations). A stress variable, suc2h  as  a  conflicting  stimulus
                  field will be employed during some of these tasks to determine the  degree  to  which
                  the time constant measure is predictive of how performance will be impaired by
                  such stresses.
                                 (b)   How well can this index, in conjunction with others help in  the
                  ide@itification of emotional shifts.  This area will be investigated in an interaction
     2             situation in which the subject is being interviewed.  In this situation a pre-assessment
                  will be made of subject material which can be calculated to'produce a mild emotional
                  response and of other material which is bland for the subject.  The simplest form
                  of this will be to determine the names of persons closely related to the subject  and
                  of others unkiown to him, or the name of the vehicle o@,vned by the indi2vidual  or
                  his address. These will be brought into an otherwise  bland  interview  and  their
                  occurrence sig-,ialled on the physiological recording. Analysis will consist of  a
                  comparison of the time constant and also of other physiological measures during
                  the bland and the especially significant periods, using the same analytic  techniques
                  as for part 1.
                            B.    Inv1estigation of a possible vascular component in the electrodermal
                  response.
                                 1.  The possibility that a vascular component contributes significantly
                  to the skin potential response will -Lirst be examined by local (iontophoretic)

                  introduction of an adiencrgic blocking agent, bretylium tosylate. This agent  was
                  shown by Lader and Montagu to eliminate cutaneous vasomotor activity but not
                  skin conductance responses.  He did not examine potential -changes. Thus a
                  vasomotor component may be responsible for an appreciablef potential shift  but
                  only a small conductance shift (as occurs on t2he arm and leg).  Consequently  not
                  only will potentials be recorded under this condition and compared with a control
                  si@e but a closer statistical examination will be made of the-extent to which
                  conductance responses are possibly attenuated.
                              2. Impedance measures at very  high  frequency  on  a  saline  soaked
                  site should provide a measure of series ohmic resistance. Soaking of  the  site
          2        should reduce or abolish the contribution to changes in such resistance by variation
                  in the length of the sweat column and hence should reflect blood volume  change
                  (as in impedance plethysmography).  Potentials will be measured concurrently
                  at the same site by the use of a filtering system now being used at this" laboratory.
                  Thus possible correlation of impedance responses with positive or negative potentia2l
                  components will be examined and the behavior of both will  be  examined  during
                  occlusion or temperature shift.
                               3. The skin will be punctured with microelectrodes  with  care  to
                  prevent damage to blood vessels. Under these conditions, the principal investigator
                  has in the past been able to record changes which persisted after  puncture,  but
                  uncertainties about activity at th7e reference site put these experiments in doubt.
                  T'ne present design calls for t@vo perforating capillary microelectrodes, one serving
                  as the reference for the other. The experimental site may then be cooled, heated,

                                                          -9-
                  engorged or occluded, and any potential responses would most likely be attributable
                  to vasomotor activity.  If positive results are obtained, in order to eliminate
                  possible contribution from the body of the sweat gland, tlie'se same experiments
                  will be performed after local atropine block.

                                               Proposc(l 13Liclzct
                 Porsonnel
                         1)1-i,icipal Investigator (I)art-til-ne)
                         Research Assistant     (Full-tii-i-ie)
                                                                FICA
                Equipment
                         Cardiotachometer_Coupler
           0              Tape recorder    Dual Channel
                E-.,:pcndable Supplies
                 S,,.ibject Fees
                 Com,outer Time
                 Travel to visit related projects
                                                        Ove-rhead-(.3&70----iN'e,-:,ot'lared
                                                                        Rate)

