                          Period from February 1) 1967 to October 15, 1967
           1. !3un-imary of Progress
                  The previous phase of this study afforded evidence fox a model of the
           electrodermal response which implied that the recovery limb contained infor-
           malion of value. An approxii-nate method for obtaining a characteristic measure
           of this limb, the recovery half-time, was adopted and used for in'-Itial explora-
           tiori-s into possible applications of the new measure. Results viere very encourag-
            in- and as a consequence a major effort has since been exerted to%vard the develop-
            ment of a more refined measure for characterizine, the recovery limb and toward
            the evalliation of its behavioral indicaeions. At the same time a parallel effort was
            ,LnainEained to conti--.iue experiments aimed at clarifying the nature of the peripheral
            mechanism of the response. The follon@,ing surnmarizes progress made in these
            areas.
                    The subsequent section on Specific Findings (11), details the quantitativ(t da[a
             of thr,,se items whose analysis has2 proceeded far enou@.,n for reporting.
                     A.  R,-rnverk7 Limb imeasure
                         1. A suoerior manual method was developed for obtaining the time con-
              st--nt of the recovery limb.  Its reliabiliL-1 bet@.veen ;corers and in repzated measures
              e%ce.:@ds 0.90.
                                                7                                  f
                                                                        ldate

                                                     -2-
                          2. The basis for t@vo automated 5ysceii,-ts for evaluatinp, L:'-tc Eirne
              cojistant was estab'LisliLd; one of these is an atialog system, Elc other digital.
              Both a-re relitively simple,
         2                 3. The discrirti       power of Elie new measure as an indicator of
              scit-nulus situation has been tested on several populations, using the manual method.
              It successfully distinguished bet@veea severa.1 paired categories of stimulus con-
              ditioi s with remar@-able reliability.
                          4. The recovery limb time constant for a given individu--l d2urin,- a
              standard stimulus situation was found to be characteristic and was correlated with
              his rate of habituat-'-On to a series of repeated stimuli. Individuals who had a short
              time constant also tended to have a slower habituation in their electrodermal
              response to a series of reaction time tests but not to a series cf tones.
                          5. The variation in tirne constant was examined in a 2population of
              subje-.ts -@'n which each was exposed to a succession of eight conditions ranging from
              restin- with eyes closed through a series of simple to complex tasks. A cold
              pressor test was also included. The Eime constant varied with the situation ill- a
              characteristic manner, being longest for the rest %ituation and becoming shorter as
              the task becomes more ir@v2olving. This finding was a consistant one across subjects
              and was independenc of amplitude. The cold pressor test, althotigh producing high
              activation, was accompanied by a long time constant (about the;same order as that
              of spontaneous responses during rest). These results stron-ly supported the
              interpretation of short time constants as accompaniments of coal directed behavior.
                          66. 51-iorter time constants were found, as predicted by Ehe model, to be
              @ssociatcd ,vitli positive skin potent'al responses and with reabeorption responses.

                                                       3 -
                      B. Studies of clic Periplieral i\'ICCIIaLliS,-Il
                          1. A major question regarding the nature of the absorbtion reflex
              (and presumably, tli@,rcfore of the ori,-riii of the posieive skin potential response
              believeci'to2 be rela.-ed to it) is whether it depends upon absorption tjlrougli the
              horny layer, mediated by ttic underlyiii,- epidermis, or upon s@,%,eat duct activitv.
              An optical device for observinz surface moi        Ila-; z ")Dorted the hxnotliesis
              that reabsorption occurs via the snveat duct.
                         2. The local potentia2l response (LPR) produced bv stretchine the skin
              was previously shokvn to contain a fast and a St            nt which often respond
              differently to chanizes in surface conditions. A given variable nay produce either
              potentiation or attenuation of the LPR in a marwer v;hich defies prediction at this
              staae, but the variation in amplitude of the experimental site is consistently
              -reat2er thaa the control and an effect of the surface variable is consequently
              statistically significant. However, only three ef.Lects are consis@ant in direction
              of chance:
                     4:3
                             a.  Reducina surface temt)erature produces an L-icreas,-- in LPR
                                 amplitude.
                             b.  --@xsa.nguination produces an 2increase in LPR amplitude.
                             c.  Ba ckgrourd ncgative electrodermal potential activity produces
                                 an L-icrease in LPR amplitude.
                          3. The striking effecl of the aluminum ion in selectively potentiating
              the positive wave or! the skin potential response was ucilized as an aid in an attempt to
              identify which coili-)onent of the biphasic potential response @vas primarilv responsible

              for the coji(iticcarice cP@LLiic-C i;t rtic c)-,osoii,.a-,ic rcsl)oiise. S;,Icc -t
              ratfier     varilitioii in clicir i7csi)oiisc to local api)licatioil of @'.ICI 37 concordance
              beL,@@,,een effects ul)on pos!Live potciitial responses @@iid effects upon coii(juctance
              responsc5 was cxa.-iiiiied. T[ic results Of tl]is Study on 20 z;ubjects raised
              more questions cliaai ic answered. AltlIOLICrIl pOtClItiatiOn Of the conductance response
              %%,as correlated2 witli the potontiitiort of t[ic potential response across subjecrs, the
                                                as
              specific relation to S?Ils of nacrative/opposed to positive direction, and Elie relation
              of polarity of currc-nt flow to do-ree of potentiacion presented a confused picture.
              .Nloreo%,er, the associated measurements of capacitance and impe2dance revealed
              no si,-nificant effect of AlCl on these for the -roup as a whole. These results are
                                        3                 0
              presently undergoing intensive examination and will not be reoorted here.
                         4. The report                           of a findin- of s-,@,eat -1,!nds
              under the nail
                                               2  lindicatino, that these were obsened onlv at
              the distal tip near the marrrin with the naked sk-Ln. A new method for ipsuring that
                                           ............
              the nail plate site Njas confined to the center of the nail and for precluding spurious
              contributions by activity of the reference site demonstrated the L@ollowino,,
                      2      a. Posicive or negatii,,e potential responses may be observed from
                                the center of the nail plate.
                            b. These are not appreciably influenced (if at all) by tlle applicatioa
                                -of various surface electrolytes.
                            c. Local potential rest)onseq of Iiizli iia.znitude k'all posieix,e) are
                     3           readily elicited from tl)is same area.

                               d.  EXOSO[liatic flail re.@;ilonses stiowinq the t%-r)ical increase iri
                                   c,-)nductance are not obser@,ed.  Rcsponses sliowing a decrease
                                   in resistance are not unusual, but entire records in which the
                                   nearby skin is active may sliow none of2 these. They are tliought
                                   to rcpresent the vasomotor effect upon cond-uctance n,r)ically seen
                                   in the impedance plectivsmogram. The lac@- of covariation betx-.,een
                                    -------------
                                   the       ILqtang
                    2                            -.2.r@sDonses and the nail pc-tential resd,)nses
                                   sug,c,,,ests that tliev rCDresent dif.Lerent. plienc-mena. At this stage it
                                   is believed that the nail potential responses because thev correlate
                                   highly Nvith skin potential responses TSPR), reoresent a comdonent
   2                                found in the SPR -,,.,hicli is not of sweat i
                                                                          Zland orizin.
                      C.  Study of Bio-Psychological Adaptabilicy
                      Initial exploration of the possibility of uslng the adaptability of autonomic
               behavior as an index of adaptability of psychological behavior has been started on a
2               population of 60 slb@ects.  These wp-re run through a battery of psychological tests
               and ther. exposed to a behavioral situation which exaniined their rate of habituation
               to a series of repeated stimuli, their rate of activ@tion from a rest state tj a "..sk
               state, and their rate of relaxation following the end of the task. Analyses cornpleted
               to date have shown that indiv2iduals who demonstrate a capacirv to maintair, a @,ii-h
               degree of appropriate inhibition during motor task, performance also show radid
               recoven, of electxodermal levels after high activation.  NIoreo,.,er, post--,ctivation
               recoverv to oririnal rest levels for pulse volume and for electroder.'Ilal acti%@irv pro-
                         3                                     J,
               ceed at different rites, and a larcre fraction of the test PODUlation shows a recit)rocal
                             ..... @@4 -         C2
               rclation bet@veen tllesc t@%vo rates.

                           Adlhk
                                                     -6-
              II. Spccific Findinizs
                      A.  Becov@u Limb of the Skin Conductance Response
                          1. inbnual measurement of the recovery li'mb time constant.
                      Gildemeister (1923) and Darrow (1937) bad described the recovery limb as
              an ex2ponential decay curve. All responses whose recovery linib Ms the same time
              constant should fall along this curve independent of amplitude as shown in figure 1.
              In actuality only the first portion of tjiis limb falls upon an exponential slope, since
              the latter ortion apparently represents a separate component -as described in the
                        p
              nr,!vious report. Because this second com2ponent may come in at various levels,
              tl,.e half-time measure previously described is subject to considerable variation in
              the activitv of the slow comoonent (fio-ure 2). In addition, if a second wave occurs
              durin- the recovery of the wave in question, measurement of the half-time is often
              precluded.  For these reasons, a method for examining the time constant of the
              early portion of the recovery l2imb was developed. In this method a transparent
              template consisting of d family of exponential curves, each having a sli-hcly Ion-er
              time constant than the one to its left, is slid sideways over the response, its base-
              line at the level of response onset, tlntil one of th@ calibrated slopes corresponds
              with the early port-ion of the recovery limb (figure 3). Interpolation is easily accomplished.
     4         A reading takes about 7 seconds, and reliability both for repeated measures and ber@veen
              scores is high (better than 0. 9). If the baseline (during inactive periods) has an
              appreciable slope, a correction must be applied. This is acccmplished by lowering
              the baseline of the template to a level half way bet@veen the level of wave onset and the

                        Agh
                      Figure 1.  Illustration of variation in apparent shape of responses
                                  -iaving same recovery time constant but different ai-nplitudes.

                                                                                                                          Ask
                        cr
                        OQ
                        (!D  SD
                        U)
                        0
                        fb
                        @3

                         Figure 3.  Nletliod c,; determining recovery limb time constant by
                                    template metliod,
  POPP=

                                                        -7-
              level at @%-I-licii it takes on rile slope of @lic restiner base'---=-.  In practice this is a
              siii-iple operation wliicli is not comi-nonly necessary.
              ings are mandatory %vlicncvcr quantitative treatincnt          tirnc- conctint is aLten)r)ted.
                     2     2.  Automatic determination of the time cc--z--:nt.
                              a.  Aiialog met[-lod;
                                   (1) S inc c the equa tion for a n expor- I cu i-ve is
                                                     dE
                                                     Tt- = _ k E
                                   Nvhcre E is the voltage, t is time       is a rate 2constant which
                                   is the reciprocal of the time conL;tE-=.
                                                     d2F, = -k @K
                                                                dt
                                   cr
                                                          Yf
                                   where Y' and Y" are the first and -c@-:-.id derivatives of the recoveri
        2                           Lin-u'i with respect to time.  Theie :@Lz'--e readily obtained by the use
                                   of ope-x,.ational amplifiers as shoN@-- - @r--ure 4.  Y' and Y" are fed into
                                   a simple division circuit which         --,i,,,antan--e of the lo,-ariehmic
                                   characteris2tics of a silicon diode          H. L.  Review of Scientific
                                   Instruments 33, 235-233, 1962, 7.       -.nfonnation of interest in the
                                   oucpi,t will be the negative peaks c-. ----z rate constanc which rilay be
                                   .neasured by a digital voltmeter.
                                   (2) Another form of th6e exponenc"@-'- -@:--ation,
                                                   log E     k-t + c

                           AglbL
                                          clot
                                                                           ico
                           0                                         0.
                                                               IcK
                                         7                   1 i
                                          %co K           1  y
                            Figure 4.  Circuit for obtaining the first and second de@:ivatives
                                       (Y' and Y") of the recovery limb.

                           AML                                                        AGML
                                  suycests that the rate constint can be obtaiiied bv the slope of
                                    Olt)
                                  log E against time or (!(Ioo- E-:)/,jt, UTnforturaEely titis would be
                                  useful only if E rep2resents vottave referrc!c: to final asymptotic
                                  level (i.e., to baseline), an arrangemeat w-iich would be com-
                                  plicated, if ijideed attainable.
                             b.   Di-itti  method:
                                  An approximate solution for obtaining the rate constant lends it-
                                  self readily to analysis by digital voltmeter2 and simple di,-!tat
                                  computation. It is based on the fact that exponential decay is
                                  essentially a percentage relacion, i.e., in a small increment of
                                  .-.!me, the percent recovery is constant regardless of the amplitude
                                  chosen.  From this it follows that the ratio of the absolute incre-
                                  mencs of rec2overy in t@vo successive increm2nts of time is related
                                  to the time constant, Thus if recovery is taking place at 5 percent
                                  per millisecond, thi recovery rate may be obtained, for example
                                  at the 1 volt level, by taking
                                            E =   05 x I volt    0500
                                          2  E2   =05 x 0. 95 volt   .0475
                                  7Q calculate the rate constant, take
                                                     I - .0-500 = Os
                                             d5  2       .0475
                                  la practice, volta-es are sampled by a digital voltmeter at 3
                                  ,5-tccessive points on the recovery limb, e.g., at 0.82 second
                                  intervals, (figure 5) s,,arting 0.5 seconds after peak and the

                       H'
                                                         TAB      Tse
                                 A
                                                                      H
                                                          K              AB
                                     B                                HBC
                                     -C
                                                              T
             1             Figur2 5. Method for determining time constant of recovery limb
                                     by di(Tital measurements.

                                                      -9-
                                 -ippropriate calculacion made cidcr manually or by
                                 coiiiputcr.
                             3.  Testing tllc discriniiiiating power of the time constant measure..
                     The t/2 measure was previously shown to be capable of discriminating be-
               t%@2,een rest and taskperformtjice and between the response to dn alereing signal and
               the response to a task, execution signal (for some subjects). The now time constant
               measure was tested on additional populations and under different conditions. One was
               a comparison on 3,5. subjects of the time constant associated with the orienting response
               to a series of tones as compared with that to a series of2 reaction time tests.  Figure 6
               sho@vs the characteristic acceleration of the recovery limb attendirg the reaction time
               effort.  Figure 7 s-iows the results for the entire population (P < .001). Onlv two
               subjects failed to show the acceleration.
                      In another evaluation (this one of the power of the t/2 measure) a population of
               16 subjects was e-.\posed to a serie2s of moderate li.-ht flashes and their orienting
               responses obtained.  They were then instructed that when the liz-,ht flashed (same light)
               ttiey were to obser-ve the position of a moving pointer, but to withhold reporting until
               requested.  Thus no motor activity was overtly Lnkplved in tiis perceptual task. Table 1
               shows the result 4-id also summari--2es other tests for comparative purposes. All but 3
               of the 16 subje(.,ts shonved an acceleration of the recovery limb during the perceptual
               task,.
                      Another example of the ability of the recovery limb to discriminate is seen in
               figure 8 which shonys simultaneous recordings from the dorsal (hand) and palmar sur-
               faces of zv,,o indi'vidual!@.6  The letter 'n indicates an ale-rtin- si-,-ial for a j'oxthcoml-ig

                                                                               RT
                         Figure  6.  RecordiTs of responses to a series of tones and a
                                     series of reaction time signals, sho%@,ing acceleration
                                     of recovery limb during reaction time series.

                            TC
                             18
                            1 5
                            1 2
                                            Goo
                              9
                                           0000
                                                                    0
                                                                    a
                                                             7     00
                                                                  OC---
                                        TONES                     RT
                        Figure 7.  Scatter diagram of recovery limb time constants of
                                  responses to tones and reaction time signals for 35 subjects.

                                           S E                                       S E
                           4.9             5.0 2.8                     3.1           7.2 5P
                           3.1            3P 1.8                      2.6           -5.7 4.1
                                                                                   2
                        Figure S. Simultaneous dorsal an3d palmar traces for t@vo different
                                   subjects showing recovexy limb time constants of responses
                                   to alerting signal (A), spontaneous activiti (S), and reaction
                                   time execution signal (E).

                                                                                MEAN
                                                                               CHANGE
      N       MEASURE            CONDITION A            CONDITION B             A to B          p
     12   12     t/2                  R est            Aggressive Game            -2.3       <.001
                                    5.6 sec                 3. 3 sec             41 Yo)
 2    16 / 13     t  2             Light Flashes        Perceptual Task            -2. 3      <.05
                                     7. 9 sec               5. 6 sec            (-29 @lo)
    35 1 32      t. c.               Tones             Reocti@on rime             -5. 5      <. 001
                                   10. 4 sec                4. 9 sed              53 olo)
                     0   Table 1.  Effect of various stimuius conditions upon recovery
                                   limb time constant.

               reaction tiiiic effort; E is tltc exccution si,@nal and S denotes a spontancous %,,,ave
               occurrin- during ttic forepcriod. Below these responses are         the time
               constants.  In the dorsal trace of the first subject, the time ccnstant of the spontane-
               ous response is approximately equal to that 2of the alerting response while the execution
               response has a. tin--c constant of approximately half this length-. Although the absolute
               levels for the palrcar and dorsal traces are different, tl-ie same relacionships hold.
                   second subject (ri.-ht hand panel) shows a different sort of relation. This subject
               has a short vime constant in the alertincr response. That of2 the spontaneous response is
               almost nvice as long. The execueion response for tMs subject has a considerably
               slower recovery limb than does his alerting response. liere again the palmar responses
               thou-h of di-fferent absolute value are in the same ratio as those from the dorsal sur-
               face. These autonomic pattern differences will be e,-Lamined for possible use as an
               indicator of characeeristic behavior patterns in an individual.
                      Figure 9 exemplifies the application of this measure in the identification of
               qualitatively different states, despite similarities in resdonse amplitude. In the upper
               trace a subject is being presented with his first series of reaction time (RT) and word
               association OVA) stimuli. There was a forewarnina, sional for the reaction time and2
               the subject in each case responded to this alerting signal as well as to the execution
               si-
                ,,nal. In trace B %@,hich occurred 8 minutes later, the subject has al)plrently
               habituated to the s.-Ztuation and lias ceased respondinc, to the alerting si,-,nal. ixotice
               tlie marked slowin- of the recovery limbs, and especia3lly that the response to tl-.e word
               association, thoug--l of similar amplitude co that Ln A, lias a -reatly differing time
               constant.

                               RT          WA                             RT
                                    RT                   t-VA                 RT
                       B
                        Figure 9. Conductance responses to reaction time signals (Rf)
                                   and word association (%VA). Traces A and B are taken
                                   on the same subject 8 niinutes apart.

                         AML
                                                                                    qp
                        4. Corrzlition r)f i@-i                cf)pstl
                    One naturall%r wonders whether t!iis nicasurc which can differentiate between
             conditions %vitliln a subject independently of rcsl)o2tise amplitude can also differentiate
             bct%,icen subjects liariiig different behavior patterns in similar situations. To answer
             this question, the recovery time constants of responses to reaction time efforts were
             used to characterize the individual subjects. Also determined for each subject was a
             measure of the rate -of habituation of tl-icir responses eit@er to a series of tone2s or a
             series of reaction ti-ne efforts as seen in figure 6. The measure of haD
                                                                                    .Lt@iation was
             the quotient of the amplitude of the second response of the series dividedi2@
             the third respo_rlse. The larger this ratio, the more rapid the habituation. Table 2
             shows the results of compar2isons across subjects.  (Square root translormation was
             used in some cases :o obtain a linear regression.)   In all cases the time constant
                                                               ( SC,&)
             measure was that of the skin conductance response obtained dur@no, the rf--action tl-.ne
             series.  Various measures of habituation rate were compared with this. Iii the first
             2case it was the skin conductance response during the reaction time ser-les. This
             showed a 0.33 correlatioa with the rec6very time constant, (P <.G'-)which is interpreted
             as indicatin- that a short time constant is associated with sustained activation
             (motivation?) in the RT task.
                    In another ccmparison, the habituation rate for SCR was obtained during the
  1           tone series and compared with the same time coftstants as above. There was no
             si(,-nificant corzela@ion.
                    Surprisingly the time constant obtained during the reaction time series.did
             correlate significan-ly %%rich clie rate of habituation of the fii-er pulse volume response

                                   HABITUATION
                 N                   MEASURE                            r                   p
                 53                 SCR during                        .33                <.05
                                    Reaction Time
                 32                  SCR during                       .13                  N. S.
                                        Tones
                  51                 FPV Change   3                    .30                <.05
                                     during Tones
                          Table     Correlation of recovery limb time const@-ncs obtained
                                    during reaction time with various babicu@-tioa measures
                                    taken across subjects.
                                        NMI

                                                    -12-
              obtained e@uring the same toiic series c,.@,-LniLncd above
                                                                     (r  O. 30, p < .05).  Tilis
              relation of SCR recovery rate to an entirely different aucorioi-,iic measure in a different
              stiiiiulus situation is view2ed as an indication of the basic significance of this measure.
                          5. Relation of time constant length to quality of stimulus situation.
                      To slied light upon the behavioral significance of chanr,,,e@:s in the time constant,
              its relation to a series of 8 graded stimulus situations @VaL$ examined. Although data
              on 21 slbjects are available, only 9 have b2een analyzed to date. The situations were:
                                   Relaxing - Eyes open - 2 minutes
                                   Relaxing - Eyes closed - 2 minutes
                                   Counti-ng aloud - 2 minutes
                                    ea ding alou d - 1. 5 m inutes
                                   Counting back-%vards by 7's - 2 minutes
                                   Deep breaths, 3 at 20 second L-itervals
      2                             Cold pressor test (ice bath) - 2 minutes
                                   Nlirror drawing - to completion
               Averao,e time constants were determined for each situation ar-d the 8 categories
               rank-ordered for each individual, tslng a rank of I for the longest. These ranks
               were then averaged for each condition. Results were in the f.:)Ilowing order:
                           Situatio6n                                    Averaize Rank
                        Rest, eyes open                                2.2 + 0.8 (Longest)
                        Cold pressor                                   3. 1 +1. 2
                        Rest, eyes closed                              3.3   1.2
                        Deep br atlis                                  4.2 - 1. 5

                                                      -13-
                         Situation                                      Average Rank-
                     Count, forward                                   4.4 +   1.2
                     Count, back-%%,ard                               5.6 +   1.9
                     Read aloud                                       6.1 +   1.3
                     i\@firror tracing2                                6.6 + 1.3' @Shortest)
              Two features of this ranking are most significant, first that time constant becomes
                                          oal direction of the be               ses.  The second is
                                                                  Ut @io
              .!!10.@er apparently as the e
              that the cold pressor test  though it produ2ced high activation shoved -%vaves Nvith
              time constants as long as those under resting conditions. This seems consistent
              with the above inference regardlno, the association of rap2Ld recovery limbs with
              goal directed beliavior. k is suggestive of a  system  in  which  mobilization  for  coal-
              directed activity.. involves activation of a rei-lex mechanism which hastens eledtro-
  2            dermal recovery.
                     Tests of stat-'-stical significance have not been made on this sample because of
              the additional analysis in progress.  Nlevertheless, inspection of the means and
              deviatior.s makes it clear that the extreme categories are significantly different.
                          6.  The biolo-ical basis for the variation in time constant was investigated
              on the basis of relations sug2gested in the last report. It had  bee-,i  hypothesized  that
              the fast component cf the recovery limb might represent an epidermal men-Lbran@!
              process, associated Nvith the reabsorption phenomenon and with the positive skin
              potential response.  Fccords from 11 subjects were examined, and L-%vo "pure"
              negative SPRs and  odo  with  significant  positive  components  were  chosen  fro3m  each.
              The tirne constants  Df  the  associated  conduccance  responses  were  measured  and  for

                                                    i4-
               all 11 subjects, were shorter vilicn associated with positive SPRS (8.7 vs 14.9
               seconds, P,@.001). A.,i example of a recor(Ung is seen in fic,,,ure 10.
                     Since the reabsorption reflex had previously been slionvn to be associated with
               the positive wav2e, the association of short recovery tin-ies witit reabsorption was to.
               be e-,\pccted.  Figure 11 shows an example (panel B) of the faster recoveries associated
               with the activation of rcal)sorption (Hydration increases up@vard). L\Iote the concomitant
               change in skin potential activity from negative to biphasic with a positive (doNin%'Vard)
               compon,'-4nt appearirg. The average time constant for the left h:ind panel was 7.4
               seconds, for the ri6Ait, 4. S. A comparison on 12 subjects showed that reabsorption
               wa-ves were associated with steeper recovery limbs at the .01 --evel of significance.
                     B.  Peripheral Mechanism
                      Because of the implicit involvement of the jceabsorption re2flex as a possible
               cause of the variation i,-i recovery linib slope, efforts were made to clarify -.ts
               mechanism.  It had been previously postulated that this phenomenon represented a
               reflex increase in epidermal permeability. When this permeability increase occurred,
               the p3,ssive moverrent of water down its concentration gradient would appear as an
               innvard movement if surface 2vapor tension were tii@,h enou.-h. However, data on the
               low permeabilicy of the corneum cast doubt that the route was through this lailer
               (and then across the epidermis) - It was considered more lik-ely that the moisture
               was returning via the sweat duct. This possibility was invest,-gated by a modification
               of the inetsk-y prism method described by Thomas and Korr (1957) w5hich is s4@nsitive to
               frank- s@@,eat (droplets). In this modificalion, a photocell was substicuted for the

                   Sp
                                                          IlOk
                   SC
                        -Fo                                                      16.7
                                     6.6
                         Figure 10.  Relation of recovery limb time constant to presence
                                     and absence of positive skin potential responses.
               4                                                             two
                                                                              ERAMM

                      HYD
                                                                                              15 MV'
                      SPR
                                                                                              I5K
                                                                                B
                         Figure 11. Relation of recovery limb time corL5tant to presence or4
                                     absence of absorption refle@-. (upper trace, absorption is
                                     downward). Note acceleration of recovery limb with
                                     appearance of reabsorptiort responses.

                pliotorrrapliic cqtiiprticiit so that continuous recorcutigs of sweat -Jro let concentration
                    p                                                                  p
                could be made.  Unlike the photographic metliod it is very important in this method
                that the light be wc'-l collimated to prevent contamination of th2e records with
                vascular changes (figure 12).  It is also necessary that there be no possibility of
                variation in skin contact at the edge of the masked area.  TesE of contamination by
                vasomotor activity were accomplished by inflation of venous and arterial cuffs on
                the arm to produce artificial vascular changes in the fingers.  The system finally
                adopted was demonstrated to be free of such contamina2tion.  The recordinos (figure 13)
                showed increases in sweat and also reab-sorption.  Although the device has been used
                thus far on only 5 s-ubjects, all have manifested the phenomenon.  It is now being
                used Ln conjunction  with  recordings  of  SPR,  SCR,  and  hydration  (elecerical  method).
                The implications of the findings with this device is  that  the  droplets  of  sweat  fo2rmed
                at the sweat pore rather suddenly disappear.  This has been confirmed by micro-
                scodic observation of the finger tip. This would indicate that  t-ie  cause  of  the  reflex
                reduction of @@tion previouslv obs !rve
                moist.,.-,ied corneum but rather to drain-@ng of the sweat dror)lets back into the s,,-:eat
                duct.  This may p2erhaps represent activity of the sweat duct wall at a relatively
                superficial level, e.g., at the germinating layer.
                                Local Potential ResDorises
                       The collectlon of data on the effects of variation in surface conditions upon LPR
                amplitude has been completed.  As discussed in the summary, a relative ranae measure
                is a better indicant of effects than is an  absolute  comparison  because  of9  variation  in
                direction of these effects.  The data may be sumii-iarized as fo'-lows:

                      Aghk
              Light                                                                         Pilo
             Source
                       Figure 12. Arrangement of light source and photoceu for observing
                                   changes in concencration of s%veat droplets by the prism
                                   technique.

                                                       Increase in Sweat
                                                          Reabsorption
                          Figure 13. Rer-ords of sweat evolution and of reabsorption obtained
                                      by the photoeleceric prism technique.

                                              -16-
           Tllc control sites were subjected to a blank procedure
                                          Numbcfr of Subjects Witli        iNT,,imber of Subjects With
                                          ENTeriiiicntat Site SIIOW-       Control Site Showing
                                          ing Widest Range AfT2er           A@lidest Range After
           Procedure     Compcncnt             Procedure                        Procedure
           o.5M Nla2SO4      Fast                   5                                 I
                             Slo-.v                 6                                 0
           5 iM I\Ta C L     Fast                   4 (I equal)                       I
                         2    Slow                   5                                 I
           0. 3t%4 A'C'3     Fast                   3                                 6
            Exsanguination   Fast                   6                                 0
                             Slcw                   3                                 3
            Temperature-     Fast                   5                                 I
                             Slow                   4        2                         2
                                                                                 vicv upon LPR
            In addition, of 7 suhiects examined for effect of background ne,,-atiNe acti .
            amplitude, all showed a substantial increase for both fast and slow components
             (ave -ra ere 4 3070, P < . 00 1) .
                    C.           Bio-PsycholoZ,!@a7@@@
                    In the initia'L examination of adaptability or "-ear-shifting" cap--city, a pop-
             ulation of 60 subjects was run ttirough a battery consisting of ttle following,
                        a) Several paper and pencil psychological evaluations including persoiality
                           trait inventories, and manifest anxiety ratiners.

                                                   -17-
                        b) Pcrformancc tcsts: desif.-,iied to exaiiiine ri,-,idity-
                           flexil)ility cliaracteristies.
                        c) A knob-turnln- test designed  to  examine  maintainance  of  appropriatq
                           motor inhibition over an extended period. The su2bject was instructed
                           to turn a large knob as slowly as possible tlirouf.;Ii 180 degrees.  The
                           time course of this effort was recorded and a comparison made of the
                           angula-- velocity in the first third with that in the last third to detect
                           I)reakdown of inhibition. This was expressed as a ratio K; a large
                           ratio si,-nifies a speeding up in the last third (i.e., loss of inhibicion).
                    Followin,y these tests the subject was fitted with electrodermal electrodes and
            a reflectance plethysmo,-raph.  He was exposed in sequence to:
                        a) 3 minutes of rest
                        b)  aseries of 5 tones, ca 80 db, 1000 cps
                        c)  aseries of 5 similar tones for reac2tion time test effort
                        d) 3 minutes of rest
                        e)  adifficult discrimination task
                        f)  5minl-tes of rest
                    Although analysis is not yet completed, it appears that the psychological and
            performance tests, e:xcept for the knob-turning task showed low correlation with the
            physiological data. The relation of SCR recovery linib time  constant  to  liabituatioa
0            rate in these runs has already been described. A relation between performance and
            physiological behavicr was also 'Lound. In these runs, as a measure of the "gear-
             shifting" abilit-y of the subject, his time for 50c' recovery from t:ne difficult

            cliscrii-nination task to base level during t[ic fijial rest period was decern-iined for
            skin con(iuctance, skin potential and finger pulse volume. The recovery half-
            tiliie for the clectrodermal level i-neaSL[rCS (not responses) was significantly
            related to K, the inliibitory ii-tde-,.. in the7 knob-curniiig task (P <. 05).  Longer
            recovery times were associated with a tendency to speed up tocvard the end of tile
            tast-,.  Put another way, the capacity to rnaint-lin inhibitory glotor control over an
            extended period was associated with an ability to sliift autonomic gears rapidly.

