              pop"
                   3
                                                W., mw
                                                                                              'OA, 53-37
                                                                       ST B
                                        The report  that follows is a corxlensation of a stu4 by   train-
                                   ing experts of  the  important  cl"sified  and  uncU391lied  information
                                   available on this subject.
                                   BACXGRDUND
                                        Brainwashing,, as a technique, has been  =ad  for  centuries  and
                                                                     In  this  sons*,  brainwashing  m"ns
                                   Is no  up24ryl   to yaychologists,
                                   involuntary re-@admation of basic beliefs and values,    AIL people
                                   we  being re-edwated  continuously.  Now  information  changes  ones-a
                                   bel.,4-ofa. Everyone has experiewed to some degree the  conflict  thi2lt.
                                          when new information is not consistent with prior belief
                                                    f the brainwashed individual differs in  that  ;;;  in-
                                       expe  once   0
                                                                        n the individual  urder  control-led
                  2                            information is fbrc*d vpo
                                                    the possibility  of  critical  judpwnt  has  been-re-
                                   @k@ by a variety of methods.
                                        Ther4 Is no question that an  individual  cm  be  broken  payebolog-
                                   leany by captors with kn2owled4a and  v!.llingmse  to  persist  in  tech-
                                   raquis aimed at deliberately destroying the integration of a personal-
                                   ity.  Although it is probable that everyone re-iuced to such a confused,
                                   disoriented state wM respond to the introduction of now beliefs, this
                                   *annoi be stated dopat2iciily.
                                   PRINCIPLES OF MDU CONTROL AND REACTION 7D COiiTWL
                                        There are progroisive steps in exercising control over an individ-
                                   zal and changing his behaviour  and  personality  integration.  The  fol-
                                   lowing five **.ops are typical of behaviour changes  in  any  controlle2d
                                   individmlt
                                        1. Making the individual aware of control  is  the  first  st&La  in
                                   changing his behaviour. A wml3L child is made  aware,  of  the  physical
                                   and psychological. control of his parents and  quickly  recognizes  that
                                   an overwhelming fore* must be re2ckoned  with.  So,  a  controlled  adult
                                   comes to recognize the overwhelring po-,mrs of the state and ttio in-
                                   personal, *Incarc*rative" machiner,,- in which  he  is  *nM93hed*  Thein-
                                   4-t-,Yidual recognizes that definite limits have been put upon the  ways
                                   he can respond.
                                                                                   Y 0    51" 0     Ir/

                                                                                                                  OA @53
                                                                                NDPD.U
                                                      @@a      t @6ii,                                                c,ontr*U-
                                                                                                         2              The    corm
                                              116                                                                         praise,
                                                                                                                       very    In-
                                                                                    over him*
                                                   tor
                                 2                                              -itrol and   recognition   of    dependence    re-
                                                 3.   The  awareness of co
                                           suit in   causing internal conflict and breakdown of previous               patterria
                                           of  behaviour*   Although   this   trar.3ition   can   be   re.Lativeiy   mild2   in
                                           the  case  of a  ebild, It is almost invariably severe for the              adult
                                           undergoing   braiw.@,ashing.    Only    an individual   who   holds   his    values
                                                        -change     thea,6a3ily,      Since      the      brainwasher-inte"ogatore
                                    2       lightly can
                                           six                                     rg6@', profom  Im
                                               'W         t,1,4 intiv@idu'&U, =:b                d     tion"  change,  they
                                            ores' their. victims,@.7.?,,BPO,c out   pa nfuu      wbaltr:-s2"&s"d  by   the
                                           controllir.g                            t4iii     iod@the@victin    is    likely    to
                                           havo   a   mental   breakdown    characterized    by    dolusiofts    and    hmucinat-
                                           ions.
                                                                  that there Is an acceptable2 soluticn to  his  pro-
                                                          first   stage   of    reducing    the'individ=lls    coTLfiict.    It
                                                           stically   reported   by   victim   of    brainwashing    that    this
                                              egyary  led  to   an   over:;"Iming   feiii@g   of   relief   that   the   horror
                                           of  intarnal  conflict   would   cease   and   that   perhaps   they   would   not,
                                           after  all,  be  driven  in3ane.  It   is   at   this   point   that   they   are   p"-
                                           pared to make major changes in their v&3,us-systems.  This is an
                    2                       automatic   rather   than   a   voluntWT   choice*   They   have   lost   their   a-
                                           bility to be critical.
                                                      Reintegration    of   vlaues   and   identification   with   the    cont-
                                           roiling  ay-atom is the     final  stage  in   changin.3   the   behaviour   of 2  -the
                                            ontroiied   lndividual'*,,A   child   who   ban   learned   a   news   socially   de-
                                            irabjo   behaviour   demonstrat4is    itsirpwtance    by    attempt-ng    to    a4-
                                           apt the nom behaviour to a variety of other situationx.  Sirdiar
    1                                       states in the brainwashed adulf, are@
                                                                                    2
                                                                                SEMT

                                                                                               IU    53-.n@
                                                                    ly independent of his former  value-
                                                        ca]*ble of thinking or speaking in  concepts  other
                                        Re-
                                           @@in no@ onger
  2                            ,,than those he has adopted. Be tends to identify by  expressing  thanks  to
                               his captors for helping him see the light.  Brainvasbing  can  be  achieved
                               vitbout using Illegal means. Anyone willing to use kno,,m  principles  of
                                       and reactions to control and capable  of  demmstmting  the  patience
                           2    M                 a child can probably achieve  successful  brainwashing.
                                 eded
                               COMWJMT CDWML TECHNIQUES AND TMM PSYCHOLOGICAL EFFEM
                                               on of usual,,commist control tec@niques follows.
                                                  ion.  There are at least two ways In  which  'interro-
                               giltion" Is tsed:,
                                        a.-,@,,@!'Zlicitation vhich is designed to get the individual to
                                    -naet'3?rotected@information,  in  a  form  of  interrogation.  One  major
                                    !i@i@L-.b@'t@vien2 elicitation and the interrogation used to achieve
                                            is that the mind of the individual must be kept clear to
                                                                     -L- of protected
                               permit coherent, undistorted disclorm                 iaormation.
                                        b.  Elicitation for the purpose of brainvashing consists of
             2                  questioning, argument, indoctrination, threats, cajolery, praise, hos-
                               tility, and  a  variety  of  other  pressures.  The  &in  of  this  interrogation
                               is to hasten the breakdovn of the individual's value-system and to encourage
                               the substitution,of a different value-system.  The procurement of protected
                               Information is secondary and is  u2sed  as  a  device  to  increase  pressure  upon
                                    indi'vid    iMe@ti6ra.-,"interrogation" in this paper vill refer, in
                               general,  to  this  type.  The  "interrogator"  is  the  individual  vbo.conducts
                               this type of interrogation and who controls the aftinist".tion of the  other
                    2           pressures.  Be in the protagonist against whom the victim'develope his con-
                               flict, and upon whom the victim  develops  a  state  of  dependency  as  he  seeks
                               some solution to his conflict.
                                    2.  Physical  Torture  and  Threats  of  Torture.  Two  types  of  physical
                               torture  are  distinguishable 2 more  by  their  psychological  affect  in  induc-
                               ing conflict than by the degree of painfulness:
                                        a. The first type is  one  in  which  the  victiu.h&s-;a  passive  role
                              @in the   pain inflicted on him
                                                             (e-g.,,  beatinp).  His  conflict  involves   the
            2                   decisior. of whether or not to give in to  demands  in  order  to  avoid  furthei-
                               ]pain.  Generally, brutality of this type van not found to achieve the
                               desired regultoo@ Threats of torture were found more
                                                                                     effective,  as   fear
                     7                  causes greater  conflict  within  the  individual  than  does  pain  it-
                               #elf.

                                                                                                                     OA     53-37
                                                                                   -lure, in ri-wpre@i.@2tia breq@ilring the
                                                                                                          , y
                                                            d                      iir@e                              other
                                                                                   liewa@it@of    X@ngen   rs,::.iiit,tb@e'indi-'-
                                                                                   dvit,   Thia,,itit",.
                                                                                            2    tw"        'glet of.resistance@
                                                                                                               passes4and     his
                                                                                                     t,@    tip
                                                                                         owe                    8    a own
                           2                                                                                         a  of   pain.
                                                                                                                      er-mination
                                          "h a- desire to collapse and dis      continu  e the   pain.   It   Is this extra
                                      internal  conflict,   in   addition   to   the   conflict   over   whether or  not  2to   give
                                      in  to  the  demands  made  of  him,  that  tends  to   make   this   method   of   torture
                                      sore effective in the breakdown of the individual personality.
                                                 Isolation.   Individual   differences   in    reaction    to    isolation    are
                                             ly greater than to any other method.  Some individuals a2ppear to
                                         able   to withstand prolonged periods of isolation without deleterious
                                            t, vhile'7&lrelatively.short,,period of Isolation reduces others to
                                                  of,lysycbosis.,-,-,@R'eiaio@n   varies,@,vith'ti@i,t26nditions   of   the   iso-
                                                    .@@,Some.sources  have   indicated   a   strong   reaction   to   filth   and
                                        rmin    although   they   had   negligible   reactions   to   the    isolation.    Others
                                      reacted   violently   to   isolation   in   relatively   clean   cells.   The    predominant
                                      cause,.2.of breakdown in such situations is a lack of sensory stimulation
                                              grayness  of  valls,  lack  of   sound,   absence   of   social   contact,,   etc.).
                                                          jeets    exposed-,to,this-,condition,have    reported    vivid     bal-
                                                            ervhelaing :t'ew's"-;ok -'Iosink @ their
                                                 Control of Communication.  This is one of the most effective
                                      methods for creating a sense of hopelessness and despair.  This measure
                                      might  well  be  considered   the   cornerstone   of   the   communist   system   of   con-
                                      trol. 2 It consists of strict regulation of the mail, reading materiala,
                                      broadcast   materials,   and   social   contact   available   to   the   individual.    The
                                      need  to  communicate  is  so  great  that   when   the   usual   channels   are   blocked,
                                      the  individual  will  resort   to   any   open   channel,   almost   regardless   of   the
                                      lwlications   of   using   that   pw4.icular   channel.   MwW   POWs   :in   Korea,   whose
                                            act of "collaboration",vas to sign petitions and "peace appeals,"
                                      defended their actions on the ground that this was the only method of
                                  2    letting the outside world know they'vere still &live.  YAny stated that
                                             -,orale and fortitude would have been Increased Immeasurably had
                                      le&rlets of encouragement been dropped to them.  Vhen the only contact
                                      with the outside world is via the interrogator, the prisoner comes to
                                     2 develop extreme dependency on his interrogator and hence loses another
                                      prop to his morale.
                                           Another wrinkle in-commmication control In the informer system.
                                     ,Th* recruitment of informers in POW camps discouraged communication
                                                                              N*ORN

                                                                                                       @,7
                                                                                               ion, lost faith in th-tir
                                                         .,k wt6tdv--fol@diid ,to.k @%m ting    individualim.'     Informers     are
     2                                                                     of   brainwashing   and   elicitation   to   develop
                                                        ,@@i@.,ovLir the victims.
                                                  -In  uct!6n  of  Fatigue.  This   is   a   well-known   devtce   for   breaking
                                        will  power  and critical power
   2                                                                        a   f          t    Deprivation   of   sleep    reaults
                                                                              0    ju
                                                 intense     psychological     debili    on  than  does  any  other   method   of
                                                                                                               'Conveyor     belt'
                2                            nderii4@'fiLtigue.,    The     communists      their rethods.
                                                                      50-60     hours      make alwet =y       individual     cam-
                                        19
                                                                   danger  that  this  will  kill  tLe   victim.   It   is   safer
                                          2 con  ui                 Ong
                                                d                      of 8-io hours e. night while forcing the prisoner
                                                ii-ii4ake-di;ii@ing the'day.  Additional interruptions in the remaining
                                           rem&
                                        2-3,howa   of.allotted   sleep   quickly   reduce   the   most  2  r&silient    individual.
                                           erna
                                          it'      fi& n stration
                                        A       'tt,                 .6f.driig   stimulants   and   deprt3s&nts   hastens    the
                                                  @@f.  t
                                        proaesw,o     a  gue and sba'@rp'm' 2        psychological    reactions    of    excitement
                                                                                         e will  to -.-esist,  also     produces
                                                                                       reased  "slips   of   the   tongue,"   for-
                                        get
                                           fulness,   and   decreased   ability   to   maintain   ord,-rly2   thougbt   processes.
                                              6.   Control   of   Food,   Water   and   Tobacco.   The   coutrolled   individual
                                        to  u&Ae.Intensely  avare   of   his   depen.-lence   upon   his   interrogator   fprthe
                                                      quantity  of  his'food   and   tobacco.   The   exercise   of   this   con-
                     2                                   f6ilovs,a  patte=..  No  food  and  little   or   no   *ater   is   per-
                                                            d,@al.for!lseveml   days-prior    to    interrogation.    When    the
                                                        t complains of this to the interrogator, the latter expresses
                                        surprize@at   suc2h,@inhumane   treatment.   He   moes   a   demand   of   the   prisoner.
                                           the latter"c        ies  be  receives  a  good  meal.  If  be   does   not,   he   gets
                                                          omp,
                                        a diet  of   wmppetizing   food   containing   limited   Yitamins,    minerals,    and
                                        calories.   This   di2et   is   supplemented   occasionally   by   the   interrogator   if
                                        the prisoner "cooperates.*  Studies of controlled starvation indicate
                                        that  the  whole  value-system   of   the   subjects   underwent   a   change.   Their
                                        irritation increased astheir ability to think clearly decrease .  The
                                        control  of  tobacco  p2resented  an  even   greater   source   of   conflict   for   heavy
                                      @.@emokerB,.  ]@ecause  tobacco  In  not  necessary   to   life,   being   manipulated   by
                                        his  craving  for  it  can  create  in  the  Individual  a   strong   sense   of   guilt.
                                              7.   Criticism   and   Self-Criticism.   These   are   mechanisms    of    co2mmunist
                                        tbou&t   control.   Self-criticism   gains   its   effectiveness   from    the    fact
                                        that-altbough it is not a crime for a man to be wrong, it in a major crime
                                        to  be  stubborn  and  to  refuse  to  learn.  Many  individuals   feel   Intensely   re-
                                        lieved  in  being  able   to   sba"4   their   sense   of   guilt.   Those   individuals,

                                                                                                 OA 53-37
                                        c
                                                                            e" is      reliable  evidence
                                        ccm=is 8 are making widespread use  of  drugs  or  hypnosis  in
                                brai                     -)n.
                       2            nvashing or  elicitati,    The exception to this is the use of common
                               stimulants or depressants in inducing fatizue and "mdod oviqp.*
                                        Other aethods@of m-sntrol vb@c vhen'uned in cOnJunction with the
                                   c processes, hasten the deterioration of prisonerat sense   of    val2ues
                               a-nd@ res:Lst4we'e  am:
                                            ]Re4lidring  case  history   or:"a'ut   lography   of"the   prisoner
                                                      a
                                                                            ob
                                    d6s@a,mlie'of information  for the interrogator in establishing     and
          2                         dociimentingl@accusatiozw.
                                        b.
                                            Friendliness  of  the   interrogator,   when   least   expected,   up-
                                      aprisoner's ability to mirrtain. a critical attitude,,,
                                                  deman    *UC  a,s;.Sevirely- li2miting-thi    allotted    time
                                                 facilities or z@iqiiiring-the'-'POW to kill hundreds   of
                                     are hbrrassmentmetbrods.
                                       d.  Prisonerb  are  often  humiliated  by  refusing  them   the   use   of
                              toilet facilities during interrogation until they soil themselves2.  Often
                              prisoners were not perm,@tted to bathe for weeks until they felt contempti-
                                       e.  Conviction   as a war criminal  appears  to  be   a   potent   factor
                                      ing    dispair---in an lndividual.,@.Oni official analysis of the pres-
                                   2   erted by the ChiCome on "confessors" and "non-confessors" to
                                   c,ipatlon In bacteriological warfare in Korea stowed that actual trial
                                    nvi(,Ition of "war crimes" was overwhelmingly associated with breakdown
                              and confession.
                                       f.  Attempted  elicitation   of   protected   Information   at   various
2                              t
                                 en  during  the  brainwashing  process   diverted   the   individual   from   awa-
                                to  of  the  deterioration  of  his  -mlue-system.@  The  fact  that,  in   most
                                 e9,@@the  ChiCome  did  not  want  or  need  such-intelligence   was   not   known
                                 the  prisoner.,  His  attempts  to  1protect  such  Information  was   made   at
                                  expense of hastening his own breakdown.

                                                                                                             OX 53-37
                                                       -,iDONTRDL:- A "SCHEDULE" Fon BpAiNwAsH=
                                                                           counts reviewed, the following appears
                                                                   riPtiOn Of vhat occurs during brainwashing.
                                                                           lloving capture, the captors are faL6ea,
                                                                             t vays or exploitation of the prisoners.
                                                                                both for those vho are to be exploited
                                                                                to 'unde2rgo brainwashing.  Concurrently,
                                                                     required  to vrite a detailed personal history,
                                      ,the prisoner 'undergoes a physical and psychological "softening-up" vhich
                                      Includes-.,@@Iiinited-ii6l*lttablelfooa rations, v:ithholding of tobacco, possi-
                            2          bl              is                        use of toilet facilities, no use of
                                         c work detai  ,seve!rely
                                      facilities for personal cleanliness, liuit*Ltion of sleep such as requiring
                                      a subject.to alee
                                                         p vith a.bzight,ligbt in his eyes.  Apparently the inter-.
      2                                                    16i@raihl@iitmateiial, the reports of the prisoner'  be-
                                           -ou3@..@,in o                                                   the   te
                                                  C,@   ntiienti,.,iind@ tentative "personality typing" by     In  rro
                                                2   Id'
                                                                   u@=    ich  exploitation  plans  are   =de.
                                               PM            asigi      vh
                                            There@isla,..uajor.1-difference between preparation for elicitation and
                                           brgLinV")l:i4,  Z-,A
            2                          for                     soner@s'exploited through elicitation must retain suffi-
                                      cient  clarity of thought to be able to give coherent, factual accounts.  In
                                      brainwashing'- on-the  other hand, the first thing attacked is clarity of
                                      thought.  To develop   a strategy of defense, the controlled individ2ual must
                                      determine vhat plans   have been made for his exploitation.  Perhaps the best
                                      ews@he can get are his internal reactions to the pressures he undergoes.
                                         ,-,,@The miest Important espect of the brainveshing process Is the interrv-
                                      gation..  The other pr2essures are designed p:-itarily to-belp the interrogator
                                      achleyt his goals.  The follcvirg states are created systematically within
                                      the indl.vidual.@ These may vaz7 in order, but c-11 are necessary to the
                                    @,,-brainvasbing process:
                                     2          A feeling of helplessness In attempting to deal vitb the impersonal
                                      im     ry of  control.
                                           2.  An  Initial reaction of  "surprise."
                                           3.  A feeling of uncertainty about vhat is required of him.
                                                    ''16ping feeling of  dependence upon the interroga
                                               A dove                                                     tor.
                                               A senso of'doubt  and a loss  of objectivity.
                                               -Feel            t,
                                                            guii

                                                                                       his c>vn Talue-rpteu-.-
                                                    Afeeling of potential 'breakdovnj,7       I.e., that he might    go crazy.
                                                             to defend@his   acquired principles.
                                                                     of-,'belo    r44,(identification).
                                                                              ngi
                                              @R4A fee@M@.,-  b@                                    impersonal     uacbinery
                                                                                                           ,@@The   individual
             2                                                                                     @@abo"@,not  only   begins
                                                                                                            be  done   about
                                                                                                   His  complaints   fall   on
                                                             loss of communication, if,he has been  2isolated,  creates
                                                      that  he  has  bem.  "forgol@UM.!   Evervthing   tba   happens   to   him
                                                  according to an,,.Iul@ers      ,tite.,.acbedule,'@tbat@@bai nothing to  do
                                                                                                                     2     He
                                                                                                                      served
                                                                                                    sed@in vhite.  The
                                                                                                     have   beg=.   He   ban
                                          no Idea what to expect.  Ample opportunity in allotted2 for him to ruminate
                                                                               -ul things
                                          upon all the unpleasant or painf                 that  could  happen  to   him.   He
                                          approaches the main.interrogation with mixed feelings of relief and
                                                Surpr        'comonly, used      tbebraimuhi=     process.  2   The     prisoner
                                                                     thiLf&Ct
                                          ,@is rarely.prepwed for              that  lnterrolptors   are   usually   friend-ly
                                          and considerate at firat.  They make every effort to demonstrate that
                                          'they  are  reasonable  human  beings.  Often  they  apolo2gize  for   bad   treatment
                                          received by the  prisoner  and  promise  to  improve  his  lot-  if  be,  too,  is
                                          reasonable.  This  behaviour  in  not  what  he  )-.as  steeled  himself   for.   He
                                          lets  down  some  of  his  defenses  and-tries  to  take  a   reasonable   attitude.
                                          The  first  occasion  he2  balks  at  watisfyi-ng  a  request  of  the  interrogator,
                                          however,  he  in  in  for  another  surprise.   The   formerli   reasonable   inter-
                                          rogetor  unexpectedly  tu=s  Into  a  furious  -a.-ni  ac.  Tlie  interrogator  in
                                          'likely to slap  the  prisoner  or  Amw  his.  pistol  and  threaten  to  sh2oot  him.
                                          Usually this storm of emotion ceases
                                                                                     as suddenly  an  it  began  and  the  in-
                                          terrogator  stalks  from  the  room.  These   surprising   changes   create   doubt'
                                          in the prisoner " to bid very ability to perceive  wwther  person's  noti-
                               2               Ions  correctly.  His  next  interrogation  probably  will  be  marked   by   In-
                                          vat
                                          passivity in the interrogeltor's ulien.
                                                A  feeling  of  uncertaintyabout  what  Is  required  of   him   Is   likewise
                                          carefully engendered within the individual.  Pleas 5of the prisoner to
                                          lea=  specifically  of  what  he  Is  accused  and  by  whom  are  side-stepped   by

                                       e interroga-t@6r'.'-'I'n'st-'t@ad,, the prisoner Is asked to tell why be    tbinks
                                     he  is  held  and  what  be  feels  be  is  guilty  of.  If  the  prisoner   fails   to
                                     come up vith anything  he Is accused in terms cdlbroad generalities (e.g-.,
                           2          espionage,     sabotage, acts of treason against the 'people').  7his  us-
                                     @@ually  proy
                                               .okes@the  prisoner  to  make  some   ktatement   about   his   activities.
                                           thIs."uk"es-the@fo of  a  dental,  be  is  usually  sent   to   Isolation   on
                                                          r2a
                                     fukhe@i.,@aec-rea@ned  food  rations  to  "think  over"  his   crimes.   This   process
                                     c                               n   As  soon  as  the   prisoner   can   think   of
                                     ......       't",@@ii6t'-iii,considered    self-incriminating,    the    interrogator
                                    2 - *'oti6t]i"'i'n'@ tbil
                                                                          @prisoner  in  asked  to   vrite   down   his
                                                                           It.
                                                                            dence upon the  intexi gator is
                                     develo
                                           ped.  It,does  no2t.take  long   for   the   prisoner   to   realize   that   the
                                               't@6r@li'@tbe source of all.punisbment  all   tification,   and    all
                                               gm
                                                                                          gra
                                                                       P'ieanvbile    demonstrates    his2     unprediet-
                                     abil                 e           o @i@isoner@@as a creature of vbiu.  At
                                                              can  be  pleased  very  easily  and  at  other   times
                                        ..eff  on  the   part of the prisoner will placate bin.   The    prisoner
                                     no
                                  2   uay  b6   to   channel so much energy into  trying  to  predict  the  behaviour
                                     of  the   unpredictable Interrogator tb&t he loses  track  of  what  is  happen-
                                     In& inside himself.
                                         After,,tbe prisoner@has developed the above psychological and emotional
                                     'reactions'@@to 2a'suffici@-nt degree the brainwashing begins  in  earnest.
                                     First,                            critical faculties  must  be  destroyed.
                                                  @ic.i@9,@@i"iguing -interrogations while looking at a  bright
                                     light. He  is  called  back  again  and  Win  for  interrogations  after2  min-
                                     @@imal sleep#@@:Ne say undergo torture that tends  to  create  internal  con-.
                                     flict. Drugs  my  be  used  to  accentuate  his  'wood  swings."  He  develops
                                     depression vben the interrogator is  being  kind  and  becomes  euphoric  when
                                     the lnterroiptor to threatenin2g  the  direst  penalties.  Then  the  cycle  is
                                     reversed.  The prisoner finds himself in a constant state of anxiety
                                     vhich prevents him from relaxing even when be Is permitted to sleep.
                                     Short periods of itiolation nov bring on visual and auditory hallucinations.
                                     The prisoner feels  bi=elf  losing  his  objectivity.  It  is  in  this  state
                                     'that the prisoner must keep.up an endless  argument  with  his  interrogator.
                                     Be may be faced with  the  confessions  of  otber  individuals  who  'collabo-
                                     rated" Vith his  In  his  crimes.  The  prisoner  seriously  begins  to  doubt
                                     his own  s2emry.  This  feeling  is  heightened  by  his  inability  to  recall
                                                                       'he people be-knows very well  or  the  date
                                     little things like the names of t
                                     'Of his birth. The Interrogator  patiently  sharpena  this  feeling  of  doubt
                                     by more questioning. This tends to  crea3te  a  serious  state  of  uncertainty
                                     vben the individual has lost most of his critical faculties.

                                                                                                       OA 53-37
                                             !;prisoner umt,  dergo,. addii-i      ernal@conflict v'hen'strong
                                                                                                        iatrin
                                                                         2        @-one cid',                ki
                                        If  ation.@'              in                 eted towards the prisoner's
                                          'code.  Every moral vulnerability Is exploited by incessant question-
                                    ing along this line until the prisoner begins to question the very fun-
                                    damentals ofhis own value-system.  The pris2oner must constantly fight a
                                    potential brebxdovn.  He finds that his mind in "going blank" for longer
                                    and,longer periods of time. He  cannot  think  constructively.  If  be  in
                                    to@,maintain any semblance of psychological  integrity, be must  bring  to
                                           this state of interminable Internal   conflict2.  He  signifies   a
                                                                 osione
                                                               e end,  no.braimmshing  would  bave  occurred.
                                                                 have givipn in to intolerable pressure.  Ac.@
                                    tually, the final stage of the brainwashing process  has  just  begun.  No
  2                                  matter what the prisoner writes in his  confession  the  interrogator  in
                                    Aot satisfied.  The interrogator questions every sentence of the confes-
                                              begins to edit It with the  prisoner.  The  prisoner  In  forced
                                             against every  change.,,  This-la-the  essence,,o2f.brainvashing.
                                                    be gives in on a point to the interroggltor@'he must re-.
                                                     confession. Still the  interrogator  I*  not  patisfied.
                                       a despezate attempt to maintain some semblance  of  integrity  and  to
                                          further brainwashing, the prisoner  wamt  begin  to  argue  thatvhat
                                           already confessed is true. He begins to  accept  as  his  own  the
                                    statements he has written. He uses many of the interrogator's  earlier
                                    oYguments to buttress  his  position.  By  this  process,  identification
                                    with the interrogator's value-system becomes comple2te.  It Is extremely
                                    iaportant to recognize that a qualitative change has taken place within
                                                       brainwashed victim'dbes not consciously  ch!!Lnge  his
                                           zt         -er the c:bange occurs despite@@his efforts. He  in  no
                                       e responsible for this cbglnge than is  an  lndividualvho  "snaps"  and
                                          a psychotic. And like the  psychotic,  the  prisoner  is  not  even
                                          of the transition.
                                    DEFENSIVE )IEASU.RES OTHER THAN ON THE POLICY AND PLANNING izm
                                         1.  Training of Individuals potentially subject to communist con2trol.
                                             Training should
                                                             provide for the  trainee  a  realistic  appraisal
                                    bf-vhat conteol pressures the communists are likely  to  exert  and  vhat
                                    the usual human reactions are to such pressures.  The trainee must learn
                     7                                                   10
                                                                      s

                                    themost effective vays of combatting his   own reactions  to  such  pressures
                                    anl be must learn reasonable expectations  as-to what  his  behaviour  should
                                    be. Training has two decidedly positive ellfects: firkst, it  provides  the
                                    trainee with ways of combatting control;  second, it provides 2 the  basis
                                    for developing an immeasurable boost in morale. Any  posit,@'ve  action  that
                                    the inaividual can take, even if it is only  slightly  effective,  gives  him
                                    a sense of control over a situation that is othervlse  controlling  him-.
                                       !@,,2.@-,"Training must provide the Individual 2with the means of recognizing
                                         istic aoil!s- foi@ himself
                                             a.  Delay in yielding may be the only achievement  that  can  be
                                    hoped for.  In any particular operation, the agent needs   the support of
                                  .knowing specifically bow long he must hold out  to  save  an  operat2ion,  pro-
                                  -@tect his cohorts, or.gaft some other goal.
                                                 The@i@@@obould be         taught how to achieve tbe-most favor-
                                                   =d@ bav to @'behave and make the necessary concessions  to
                                    obt4Lin minimum penalties.
                        2                     c. Individual behavioural responses  to  the  various  communist
                                    control pressures differ markedly.  Therefore, each trainee should know
                                    his own particular assets and limitations in  resisting  specific  pressures.
                                    Rc( can learn these only under laboratory conditions  simulating  the  actual
                                    Pressures-be may have to face.
                                             d.  Training must provide knowledge of the gc,:,ls and the  restric-
                                    tions pla@ced@upon big communist interrogator. The  trainee  should  know
                                    vbat controls are on his interrogator and to what extent  he  can  -ni  ulate
                                                                                        2                  p
                                    the interrogator. For example,-the interrogator  is  not  permitted  to  fail
                                    to gain "something" from the controlled  individual.  The  knowledge  that,
                                    after the victim has proved that he is a "tough nut to crack" be  can  scrde-
                                    times Indicate that be might compromise on some little point  to  help  the
    2                                interrogator in return for more favorable treatment, may  be  useful  in-
                                    deed. Above all, the potential victim of communist  control  can  gain  a
                                    ipreat deal of psychological support from the knowledge that  the  cmm  unist
                                    interrogator In not a completely free agent who can do  whatever  be  wills
                         2           with his victim.
                                             e. The trainee must learn what practical cues  might  aid  him  in
                                    recognizing the specific goals of bin interrogator.  The strategy of defense
                                    ownst elicitation may differ markedly from the strategy to prevent
                                    brainwashing. To prevent elicitation, the individual  may  hasten  his  ow0n
                                    state of mental confusion; whereas, to  prevent  brainwashing,  maintaining
                                    clarity of thought processes Is imperative.

                                                                                                      OA 53-37
                                                                good,neal,
                                                 In -Particular, it should be emphasized to the trainee that,
                                    although little can be done to control tbepressures exerted upon him, be
                                    can lea2rn something abvut@coirtrolling his'personal reactions to specific
                                    pressures.  7be trainee can gain much from learning something about in-
                                    ternal conflict and conflict-producing mechanisms.  He should learn to
                                    recognize when someone is trying to arouse guilt feellits and what be-
                                    havioural2 reactions can occur an,a response  to  guilt.
                                                          train,                                  an be utilized
                                                      cular coum=ist,control-
                                        Ilicitation.@ In  general, individuals who are the hardest.to Inter-
                                    rogate for information are those who have experienc2ed previous interroga-
                                    tions.  Practice in being the victim of interrogation is a sound train-
                                      @de@vICL'*
                                                    e trainee should  learn something abcyut-the principles of
                                                    'Tbere In a mxim= to@@ib'6;8@mount of pain"th2at can actually
                                      felt.  Any amount of pain can be tolerated for a limited period of
                                    time.  In addition  the trainee can be fortified by the knowledge that there
                                    are legal limitations upon the amount of torture tbilt can be inflicted
                                    by communist jailors.
                                        Isolation.  The  sychological 2  e eta of isolation can probably be
                                                        p              ffe
                                                                          -systematic efforts on the part of
                                    thwarted beat by uental gymnastics and
                                    the icolate to obtain stimulation for his neural end orge
                                        Contivls on Food and 7bbacco.  2Food given by the  communists will
                                ,@@'alvays be enough to maintain survival.  Sometimes the victim gets unex-
                                    I>eeted opportunities to ex,.pplement his diet with special minerals, vitamins
                                    and other nutrients (e.g., "ir6n' from the rust of prison bars).  In some
                                    instances, experience2 has shown that Individuals  could exploit refughl to
                                    eat.  Such refusal usually resulted in the transfer of the individual to
                                    a
                                    hospital where he received vitamin injections and nutritious food.  Evi-
                                    dently attempts of :this kind to commit suicide arouse the greatest concern
                                    In communist officials.  If5 deprivation of tobacco is the control being
                                    exerted, the victim can gain moral satisfaction fr-ot 'giving up".tAlLeco.
                                    He can't lose since he is not likely to get any anyway.
                                                                      12
                                                                   s

                                                                                                                                      to
                                                                                 si@lii-e        example,   mild physical     exercise
                                                   writing Peramal Accounts and Self-Criticiffm.  Experience                  has in-
                          2                   dicated   that   one   of   the   most   effective   ways   of   combatting   these    pressures
                                                                                 -with an overabundance       of enthusia
                                             Is  to    enter     li2to,,the,spirit                                          sm.       Endless
                                           '@"vr2itten@@accomi         @@inconsequential material has virtually 'smothered'
                                             some eager.@linter.Toga  ra.,-,.-In the,sene spirit, sober, detailed self-
                                                                      ,:to
                                                          v"o:c." th'   -t@ainute!@triins"- has   sometimes    brought    good     results.
                                                                  a   moo
                                                                                                  :tons, htl       d@,,ditfend.  Perfectly
                                                                                                   execution of an individualts
                       2                                                                    le-in this situation.  Tbke the ex-
                                                                    grade military officer.         He   has   knowledge    of    sensitive
                                             strategic,intelligence which it is his duty to protect.  He has the respon-
                                                                              2        i6aa.,,fitness of his men and serving an
                                                                                                                          the cany@
                                                                                                                             dant as-
                                                                                                                          amething      for
         2                                    It.   Thus   to   satisfy   one   responsibility   he    must    compromise    another.    The
                                             officer, in short, is in &:constant state of internal conflict.  But if
                                             tbe'officer is given the relative priority of his different responsibilities,
                                             he  Is  sulyportbd  by  the   knowle2dge   that   he   won't   be   held   as   pecountable   for
                                             ww other behaviour if he does-his utmost to carry out his highest priority
                                           ,.''"sponsiblllt        There Is considerable evidence that many individuals-
                                             tried to iisii3aiii@tA2e priority of th2eir responsibilities on their ovn,
                                           '?-but, were..
                                                        ln.,conflict@over.@@Vhetber    others    would    subrequently     accept     their
                                                                     tbat@   o@ne'       dual   was   probably   brainwashed    vhile    he
             2                                                         t
                                             was trying to pro      ec  bi=sl-lf axaimt elicitation.
                                             C*NMUSIONB
                                                   The      application of knoim psychological principles can lead to an
                                             understanding of brainwashing.
                     2                             .1.  There    in    nothing    mysterious    about    personality    changes    resulting
                                           .,from the brainwashing process.
                                                   2.   Bra:immobing is a complex process.  Principles of motivation,
                                                                                                                             -tOr
  2                                           perception,    learning, and physiological deprivation,are needdd                       -acco=t'
                                             for  the results achieved in brainwashing.
                                                        Brainwashing Is      an  Involuntary re-educotion of the          fundamental
                                             bellefs   of,tbe indivi6dual.        To   attack   the   problem   successfully,    the    brain-
                                             washing process must be       differentiated clearly from general            education
                                             methods   for thought-control,ormass indoctrination, and elicitation.
                                                                                         13

