                                                                                                                                        AL- P-
72 -73
                      4@,
                                                                                                                                           JUNE
1972
                                                                       UNSOLICITED PROPOSAL
                                     FOR RESEARCH IN MONITORING2
                                                               LIV       I N    G      P   LANTS
                                                                              APPROVED BY
                                                                                                STAF
                          I 9 7 2 Leadership
                              5 in Science
                          2                                                                     9                       ALBUQUERQUE DIVISION
                          Y E                    y                                     GOVERNMENT             COMMERCIAL SYSTEMS GROUP
                                   &Technolog
                                                                                       E L. &INC 9.13 GRADOWAY DRIVE S E ALBUGLJC-IMGLJE. N

                                                             CONTENTS
                                                                                                      Page
                     CHAPTER1           INTRODUCTION        ..........
                                        1.1     General Background      .........
                                        1.2     Summary of Proposed Areas of Investigation.           1-2
                            2                    1.2.:l    Crop    Control    System ............      1-2
                                                1*  2.2   Early  Warning  of  Natural   Disasters.   .1   2
                                                10  2.3   Communication System - Plant to
                                                          Man          ............                   1-3
                                                1.2.4     Intruder     Alarm      Sys2tem      ....      1-3
    ,F..                                        1.2.5     Psychology Tool and Mental Illness
                                                          Monitor            ......    O..*      ....... 1-3
                     CHAPTER       2    TECHNICAL DISCUSSION          ..........                      2-1
                                                Introduction           ............
                                        2.1                           2                                2-1
                                        2. 2    Investigation Steps               .................... 2-1
                     CHAPTER       3    SUMMARY OF CURRENT KNOWLEDGE ON PLANT
                                        ELECTRONICS       ..............                   ........... 3-1
                     CHAPTER       4    TIME    AND    COST    ESTIMATES     FOR     PLANT
                                        ELECTRONICS                          .2.....
                                                                                                      4-1
                     CHAPTER       5    EG&G AND ALBUQUERQUE DIVISION
                                        BACKGROUND        ...........        0          .............. 5-1
                                        5.1     Corporate History          ........                   5-1
                                        5  2    Albuquerque    Division    2 Organization ........     5-2
                                        5.3     Albuquerque    Division     Directorates ........     5-4
                                                5.3.1     Engineering Directorate                     5-4
                                                5. 3. 2   Programs      Directorate....      ....       5-7
                                                5.3.3     Administration    and    Finance
                               2                           Directorate                           ...... 5-7
                     APPENDIX A   RESUMES          .......       ......                              oA-1
                                                                                       41   0 0
                                                         ILLUSTRATIONS
                     Figure                                                                           Page
                      5-1        EG&O Corporate Organization             .......       .......        5-3
                      5 2        Albuquerque Division Organization                    ................ 5-5
                                                                                                       77
                                                                   7

                                                         CHAPTER1
                                                       INTRODUCTION
                    1.1         GENERAL BACKGROUND
                                In 1966, a polygraph expert, Mr. Cleve Backster, tested a plant
                    with a polygraph to see if  he  could  get  an  indicationof  water  rate  absorption
                    by the plant. Instead, he got a  reaction  on  the  s2trip  chart  record  similar  to
                                                 a      an  under  stress.  Highly   intrigued,   Mr.
                    the readout obtained from  hum
                    Backster  soon  discovered  that  the  plant  responded  to  his  thoughts.   The
                                   ming the plant was sufficient to trigger a violent reaction that
                    thought of har
                    was  clearly  registered  by  the  polygraph.  Mr.  Backster's   c2ontinuing   studies
                    have indicated that further research in this area may open up some interesting
                    and beneficial applications.  Much of this early research has been directed
                    toward  finding  out  more  about  the  nature  of  the  communication   response
                    from  plants.  Mr.  Frank  Wilcoxson  of  EG&G   has   performed   initial   research
                    in this area to the extent that he and EG&G researchers beli2eve that some
                    very beneficial practical applications of the principles already discovered
                    are  possible  even  before  the  nature  of  the  communication  phenomena   are
                    fully  defined.  Therefore,  based on  their  'initial  research,  EG&G  is  sub-
                    mitting this  proposal  to  explore  some:of  the  more  promising  practical  appli-
                                he  areas  proposed  for  r2esearch  are  listed  here   for   summary
                    cations.    T
                    purposes and discussed in more detail later..
                                (1)   Crop control system
                                (2)   Natural disaster early warning system
                                (3)   Communication system - plant to man
                                (4)   Intruder alarm system
                                (5)   Psychology tool a9nd mental illness indicator.
                                Investigation of these areas appears feasible at this time based
                    on  research  performed  by  Mr.  Frank  Wilcoxson  of  EG&G  and  as   reported   in
                    the literature. A bibliography of this literature  is  provided  at  the  end  of
                    this   chapter. A brief discussion of prior  research  is  included  here  as  it
                    pertains to each proposed area of investigation.

                    1.2        SUMMARY OF PROPOSED AREAS OF INVESTIGATION
                    1.2.1      Crop Control System
                               An article in the Soviet Newspaper Pravda dated 12 October 1966
                    describes the basic elements of a "crop control"     system.  The crop control
                    investigation proposed here is similar to the one described and referred to
                    as "things to come  n the article,
                  2             The technique involved is to select various  crop  plants  such  as
                             matoes, wheat, etc., and remove a number of the plants to a con-
                    corn, to
                    trolled environment.  The plants will be grown under nearly identical condi-
                    tions until they reach a monitorable size.  The plants in the controlled
                    environme
                               nt can then be electronically monitored un2der varied conditions of
                    nutrients, environment, etc., to  determine  the  ideal  conditions  based  on
                                      The data derived can then be used to improve soil or other
                    plant response.
                    conditions for the entire crop.  Similar setups could be arranged for insect
                    and disease treatment and control.  The data derived could be fed into a
                                                                m2puter to derive the value of various
                    computer memory bank         enabling the co
                    nutrients and conditions.  Since plants have been shown to be responsive to
                    human presence, the data would have to be taken by remote monitoring and
                    simple automatic triggering systems,
                               There is also the
                                                  prospect that enough data on crop control could
              2      be accumulated during the first six months of a study to verify a crop control
                    hypothesis, and the remaining six months of a one-year study could be devoted
                    to a natural disaster warning concept research.  This concept will be dis-
                    cussed next.
                    1. 2.2     Earl-y Warning of Natural Disasters (Earthquakes, Avalanches  etc)
                               The objective here is to find plants most receptive t2o that natural
                        ning system that directs birds and animals to leave  areas  that  will  be
                    war
                    affected  by such disasters long before the event actually occurs. As indicated
                    in the bibliography, this exodus  from  such  areas  has  been  observed  many
                    times.  Once the plants that are most receptive to this warning system are
                    found, the development bf long-life monito9ring equipment can be accomplished
                    as well as the design of systems used to tie the plant response  data  into  a
                    regional or national alert system.
                                                                -2

                    1.2.3     Communication System - Plant to Man
                              In' ial testing of the crop control system and natural disaster
                                it
                    wa
                      rning system requires the elimination of close proximity contact between
                    man and plant, The investigation of this communication system will require
                                                                                    as fa2r as
                    the monitoring of plant and man smultaneously and the exclusion
                    is possible) of all disturbances.
                                                   -to-plant tie of some sort must be investigated
                              This concept of a man
                    thoroughly, and the investigator will be challenged to find answers as to ho
                    to conduct this investigation in the best way.
                    1. 2.4    Intruder Alarm2 System
                              Mr. Wilcoxson of EG&G has found that some plants will respond
                    to the presence of strangers or intruders at distances up to 30 feet.  This
                    application seems highly feasible at this time. Here again, however, the
                    optimum plant for the system must be found and checked for longevity of
                    response life, etc. -this plant must then be tied to a long-life electronic
                 2   system capable of triggering an alarm of some type.
                    1. 2.5     sychology Tool and Mental Illness Monitor
                              As reported in the literature by Mr. Backster and verified by
                    Mr. Wilcoxson of EG&G plant response to human emotions is fairly well
                    established.  This principle could possibly be tied td the field of psychology
                     nd may be helpful in work related to the mentally ill and possi2bly with
                    a
                    mentally disturbed children.
                              This particular area wou d require a great deal of research with
                    both plants and patients and, at this time, would appear to be an area to
                    be investigated slowly and thoroughly. ff the plant served no other purpose
                    other than to identify a person who is mentally ill, at a very early stage in
                    that illness, then the resea4rch effort would be well spent.
                                                         1-3

                                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY
                                    Bacon Thorn;  "The Man Who Reads Nature's Secret
                                    Signals, 11 National Wildlife, February/March 1969;
                                    4-8.
                              2.    Backste   Cleve; Int
                                           r,                       rnal of Parapsychology,
                                                      2 ernational Jou
                                    Winter 1968; 329-348.
                              3.    Robbin Janice and Charies;"StaAling New Research from
                                    the Man Who Talks to Plantstl National Wildlife,. October/
                                    November 1971; 21-24.
                              4*    Lawrence, L. G.; "Electronics and the Living Plant,
                                    Electronics World2 October 1969.
                              5.    Shuvaton, L., trans.; "The Powerful Li-Iliputian, Pravda
                                    No. 285, 12 October 1966; pg. 3; Foreign Te
                                                                              chnology
                                    Division USAF AD678622 FTD-HT-23-1161-67.
                              6.    Wilcoxson, F. W.; Plant Response Data Old and New, EG&G
       7                             Report No. 1; 1 April 1972
                                                        1-4

                                                         CHAPTER 2
                                                  TECHNICAL DISCUSSION
                      2.1        INTRODUCTION
                                 One must keep in mind that the field of  investigation  addressed  in
                      this proposal is, in essence, a new scientific area that will initially  require
                      establishment of a basic standard measurement or data gathering system.
            2          This will include the development  of  measuring  techniques  dependent  on  the
                      specific area of investigation.
                                 Investigation may reveal that electrode to electrode measurements
                      w                     he exploration of the communication field desc
                       ill perform well in t                                                ribed.
                      A method of recording changes in the light  passin2g  characteristics  of  leaves
                      may be more useful in the crop control system, etc. Assuming that mag
                      netic charges occur in plants,  measurement  of  this  parameter  may  prove  to
                      be of great value.
                                 l@efore any one area can be fully explored researchers must con-
                      firm that data is repeatable, that available instrumentation  is  adequate,  and
                      that measurem2ents are not being influenced by external electrical noise.
                      -The most active or receptive plants must be found and their useful time
                      limits established. Some plants show a  tendency  to  stop  responding  to  cer-
                      tain stimulation after repeated exposure to the same stimulant day after day.
                                 Standards must be derived that can  be  used  for  direct  comparison
                      with plant data obtained i2n the lab.
                                 The basics for this new area  must  be  established.  Once  this  has
                      been accomplished, specific areas of practical value can be investigated.
                      2. 2       INVESTIGATION STEPS
                                 The steps for establishing the  basic  investigation  procedures  and
                      standards are outlined below:
                                 (1)   various electronic probe s9ystems will be  tested  in  order  to
                                       verify their value in the response studies and determine
                                       their shortcomings.  This will include electrodes light
                                       sensors  magnetic sensors, etc.
                                                               2-1

                               (2)   Electronic components will be tested for drift and suscep-
                                     tibility to noise. These components must be capable of
                                     operation over long time spans.'
                               (3)   Probes and, electronic components will be assembled as a
                                               -tested for drift, noise, etc.
                                     unit and re
            2                   (4)   Plants will be selected and tested for response to stimulation
                                     of various kinds.
                               (5)   Preliminary tests will be run to determine repeatability  of
                                     response to various stimulation.
                               (6)   The best combination of plant  probe,  and  electronic  com-
                                     ponents can then be used to start2 the data gathering  proce-
                                     dures.
                               (7)   In addition to plant output data, environmental conditions
                                     will be recorded. This data will include temperature,
                                     hu  dity, barometric pressure plant diets, soi.1 conditions
                                        ml
                                     (acid, neutral, or alkaline), etc.
                   2            (8)   To ensure maximum protection from outside electrical inter-
                                     ference  all testing should be conducted in a screen room
                                     located within the hothouse. Assurance of data validity:
                                     (a)     All test equipment will be subjected to calibration
                                             runs immediately prior to and after all test rims.
                                     (b)     All test equipment will be checked for noise pickup at
                                             least every two weeks.
                                     (c)     All test equipment will be calibrated every 30  days
                                             to ensure that no erroneous readings are introduced
                                             into the data due to incorrect equipment handling
                                             and/or adjustments. All critical data8 gathering equip-
                                               ent adjustment points will be sealed after calibration.
                                             m
                                                             2-2

                                                      CHAPTER 3
                                                     KNOWLEDGE ON PLANT ELECTRONICS
                           SUMMARY OF CURRENT
                               Mr. Cleve Backster first became aware of the plant electronics
                     phenomena on February 2, 1966.  He w
                                                            as testing a plant with a polygraph
                     machine to see if he. could ge2t an indication of rate of water absorption by
                     the plant and got a reaction (on the strip chart record) similar to the graphical
                     readout obtained for a human when under stress.
                               Mr. Backster was first to note plant reaction to human thought
                     and emotion, first to tie plant response to the death of brine shrimp, etc.,
                     and is presently, as far as can be ascertained, investigating the possibil2ity
                     of a cell-to-cell communication system and the possibility that memory,
                     etc., may exist at the cel-I level.
                               He has made many plant experiments, including using a plant to
                     point out a student who destroyed another- plant in the same room; the
                     student was selected by the plant.from five possible choir-es.. Mr. Backster
                     is also attempting to teach p2lants to recognize objects,
                                                                            and he has recorded
                     the response of one egg when another was broken.
                               An article by @ Mr. L. G. Lawrence listed in the bibliography in
                     Chapter 1 describes various systems for monitoring plant reactions via
                     electronic and other means and describes some of the work done by Mr.
                     Backst2er. He also verifies the plant memory theory and points out another
                     way of training plants by the use of electric shock. An article appeared in
                     the Soviet newspaper, Pravda,, that describes the basic ingredients for a
                     crop control system similar to that described in this proposal.  The author
                     of that article would have one believe that the article was a prediction of
                     things to come.  However, it is2 highly possible that the article describes
                     an existing test facility.
                               Other so-Lirces of data are available, but extremely hard to get
                     since investigators are reluctant to disclose data that is not yet complete.
                               Mr. Wilcoxson of EG &G has verified some of W. Backster's
                     data and also looked-at areas not covered in the known published data as
                     follows:
    1                                                      3-1

                                    Questions have been presented to plants by simply thinking
                                    of these questions and recording the plant's reaction on a
                                                                         e was to try to establish
                                    strip chart recorder.  The object her
                                    a "yes" or no and/or "O to 1" state by human mental stimu-
                                 2   lation of the test plant. No "yes" or flnolt response could be
                                                                      -to this
                                    established as the plant's reaction       human mental
                                    stimulation resulted in a complex waveform. A different
                                    waveform was recorded for each different question presented
                                    to the plant.  The test plants res2ponded to 56 percent of the
                                    questions presented.
                              (2)   While running a test on a cactus plant, an erratic fuU swing
                                    to the left was noted and subsequent investigation of the
                                    immediate test area revealed that a stranger had approached
                                    the test area and departed without letting his presence be
                                    2known to the test area occupants.  This test was repeated
                                    a week later and four such close passages of strangers to the
                                    test area were recorded.  Two of the four indicated tres-
                                                                        ot be verified.
                                    passes were verified and two could n
                              (3)   An attempt to run tests on several previously responsive2
                                    plants failed when testing was conducted durino, a severe
                                                                                         what
                                    wind storm. The test plants would not settle down to
                                    had been previously observed to be a normal state on the
                                    records. After the storm, normal response was resumed.
                             (4)    An e2yewitness has been found that has described a test run
                                    on a tree in the vicinity of a snow slide in Colorado two or
                                    three years ago.  The witness indicated that analysis of the
                                    data obtained showed a definite disturbance in the tree's
                                    response curve that started two hours before the snow slide
                                    occurred and returned to normal after4 the slide was over,
                                    The test tree was about 600 yards from the slidd area.
                                                         3-2

                              (6)   Tests
                                          run on wild bird eggs indicated a response to thoughts
                                    of breaking the egg.  This curve was identical to that obtained
                                    on a plant under threat except that it was opposite in polarity.
                              (7)   Mr. Wilcoxson has started testing tomato plants on a varied
                                    diet basis as des7cribed previously in this proposal.
                                                          3-3

                                                           CHAPTER 4
                                  TIME AND COST ESTIMATES FOR PLANT ELECTRONICS
                                 The. materials cost and labor figures shown below are based on a
                      concentrated  one  year  research   effort.
                                 Labor                                         $51,293.00
                                        Consultants                          $20   3822.00
                                            Botanist
                                             Psychologist
                                            Chemist
                                 .Materials                                    $192817.00
                                        Hothouse and associated equipment
                                        Electronics     equipment
                                        Plants, planting materials
                                     2   Misc. cables, connectors, etc.
                                                                 Total:        $91,492.00
                                   noted that the material cost would apply to the entire program as
                      It should be
                      an initial expense.  The labor figures could encompass a two-year, one-half
                      time  effort   etc.
                                 Some data related to the natural disaster early warning system
   2                   would probably be forthcoming during this initial effort due to the fact that
                      the Albuquerque area, where testing would be conducted, is subject to earth
                      tremors, severe electrical storms, and occasional severe wind storms.
                                 There is also the prospect that enough data on crop control could
                      be accumulated during the first six test months to verify the crop control
                      syst2em hypothesis, and that the remaining six months could be devoted to
                      the  disaster  warning  concept   research.
                                 Extensive testing of the disaster Nvarnin- system would require field
                      testing, more elaborate electronics equipment, and e@,,tensive travel time.
                                 Investigators would also expect to derive some data related to the
                      man-to-plant communication 5theories stated.  This would be a natural side
                      product of the test records.  Complete investicoration of this communication
                      aspect would require a separate program utilizin- much more refined elec-
                      tronics test equipment and more elaborate facilities.
                                                                4-1

                                                             CHAPTER5
                                           G AND ALBUQUERQUE DIVISION BACKGROUND
                                       EG&
                          5.1       CORPORATE HISTORY
                                    In 1947, the MIT-based partnership of Edgerton, Germeshausen
                                                     a
                          and Grier (EG&G) formed2      company to continue classified research, develop-
                          ment, and instrumentation work previously perlor  ed under their direc
                                                                               m                        tion
                          for the Manhattan Project.   For the first few years, the company was pri-
                          marily a contractor to government agencies, providing timing and firing
                          control,  2diagnostic  instrumentation  systems,  and  field  operational  support.
                          The  company  now  is  diversified  into  commercial  electronics,   oceanography,
                          instrumentation operations,  and  other  specialized  technology,  in  many  parts
                          of the world. It specializes  in  the  sophisticated  instrumentation  needed  for
                          today's technology, both in connection with other projects and separate2ly.
                          Eniironment  monitoring  systems  have  been  set  up  with  computer   controlled
                          functions  and  complete  meteorological  data  gathering  and  processing  systems
                          have been  fielded  and  are  being  operated  by  EG&G.  Other  weather  modifica-
                          tion       programs,       includingcloudseedingandfogdispersal,havebeenperformed..
                                     Upon  enter2ing  the  commercial  products  market,  EG&G   first   pro-
                          duced new versions of  electronic  flash  tubes  and  flash  equipments  developed
                          years earlier by  the  partnership.  Next  were   standard   ceramic-metal   hydro-
                          gen thyratrons and rectifiers, and special-purpose instruments for ultra-
                          hitrh-speed measurements.  An airborne instrumentation system was produced
             2             for the Air Force and this was followed by  a  great  number  of  special  projects
                          rancrinc., from electromagnetic pulse simulation to laser scanning systems.
                                     Dr. Harold E.-  -Edgerton's  personal  interest  in  underwater  photog-
                          raphy led to the  development  of  cameras  and  light  sources  for  ocean-bottom
                          research  and  exploration.  The  long  standing  pro2blem  of  positioning  cameras
                          and lights at a known distance above the bottom of the ocean was solved by
                          developing a compact, accurate *Sonar pinger system.  This was soon followed
                          by  the  development  of  powerful  acoustic  transducers  for  ocean-bottom  pro-
                          file survey work.  EG &G underwater equipment is extensively used in
                          searches for sunken ships, submarines, etc. 8 For example, EG&G equipment

                             located the subniarine Thresher, and rece            ntly was used to locate a sunken
                             frei-liter in the Gulf of Mexico.
                                          The company's growth was steady during the late 1950's and early
                             1960's.  The small, commercial products and oceanographic business, plus
                             a tochnolo,-ical backlog built up over the years, provi2ded a sound base for
                             accelerated (Trowth and increased diversification.
                                          Company resources were applied to the development of new pro-
                             ducts and an advanced technological capability in the fields in which it had
                             an established position-.  high-energy pulse discharge components and sys-
                             teiiis, ultra-fast measurements, el2ectronic flash components and systems,
                             nuclear instrumentation, and oceanography.  Company-funded research and
                             development was a key element in the expansion (see Figure 5-1).
                                          Today, EG&G is a multi-element company with broad technical
                             capabilities and business interests.  Research and development, instrumen-
                             tation system desig2n, engineering service work and manufacturing encbm-
                             pass the fields of physi
                                                          cs, electronics  optics, nuclear science, and com  ter
                                                                                                                          PU
                             sciences.  In the non-government business areas, EG&G companies are
                             en,-,a,,2ved in the fabrication of new products and large-scale field support
                             services work.  This background and technology base provides a good reser-
                             voir of skill and knowledge to support research in the new area of research
                             and monitoring responses of living plants.
                             5. 2         ALBUQUERQUE DIVIRON ORGANIZATION
                                          Just seven years ago, t2he entire EG&G operation at Albuquerque
                             consisted of 15 employees housed in a modest office.  Today, 400 EG&G
                             personnel are employed in a spacious, modern facility occupying approxi-
                             mately six acres of the University of New Mexico Industrial Park.
                                          This phenomenal growth rate is a direct result of the professional
                             capabilities of the 2Division's personnel.  Individually and collectively, they
                             provide both specialized and interdisciplinary scientific knbivledge which can
                             then be applied toward the solution of almost any state-of-the-art problem.
                                          Enhancin,-
                                                        this capability is the broad scope of the Division's
                             operations which covers a7n extremely wide range of scientific disciplines.
                                                                              5-2

                                                                     BOARD OF DIRECTORS
                                                                        B. J. O'KEEFE
                                                                         PRESIDENT
                                                                                    R. G. B. FELT     H. E. G]
                                                K                                                       2    IIER
                                                co               SR                 CE PRESIDENTI            IDENT
                                                I      I    VICE PR                 pi
                                         FIREE                                    rv
                                                                      GOVERRUENT AND
                C4                                                   COL'MERCIAL SYSTEMS   2                                            LOS
ALAMOS
                         T                APPLIED
                                                ay                         GROUP
                         p               ECHNOLO     I                                                                                  
DIVISION
                                            GROUP        ROU              H.V.WALLACE
                                                                     SR. VICE P2RESIDENT
                                                                                                                    GMX
                                                                                                               GAI
                                                      BEDFOR             ALBUQUERQUE       SANTA BAREARAI
                                                      DIVISIO             DIVISION
                                   3                                                                             "IVI"011-
                                                           Figure 5-1.      EG&G Corporate Organization

                        For example, EG&G Albuquerque has proven capabilities in systems engin-
                        eering, program management, conceptual design, advanced design, planning,
                        testing, evaluation, operation, and data analysis.
                                  The Albuquerque Division is directed by Dr. James L. Dick,
                        General Manager, who  reports  to  H.  V.  Wallace,  Senior  Vice  President  of
                 2       EG&G.  A chart of the Albuquerque Division organization is shown in Figure
                        5-2.
                                  The Albuquerque Division of EG&G is assigned to the Government
                        and  Commercial  Systems  group  of  EG&G.  The  entire  group  is  made  up  of
                        the Bedford, Albuquerque, and Santa Barbara Divisions as well as GAI/GrvIX.
                        As indicated on the Albuquerque Division O2rganization Chart, the Division is
                        orcranized into major directorates that are described  in  the  following  para-
                        rraphs.
                        5.3       ALBUQUERQUE DIVISION DIRECTORATES
                        5.3.1     Engineering Directorate
                                  The  Engineering  Directorate  encompasses  the  technology  of   clec
                        tronic/electrical, mechanical, and electro-opti2cal engineering, and theoreti-
                        cal and analytical pnysics.  The directorate has a proven capability in analvsis
                        and the application of computer  oriented  techniques  to  scientific  problems.
                        Capabilities and experience have been demonstratect in the follonvinfr general
                        areas:
                                  (1)    Design and development of special-purpose elect2ronic,
                                         digital and analog data acquisition  microwave data, and
                                         electro-optical (including photo, optical, laser,  televisioti)
                                         systems.
                                  (2)    Design, installation, and operation of ENIP dia-nostic
                                                                                          iz,
                         2                instrumentation.
                                  (3)    Design  of  timing  and  firing/command  and  control  systems.
                                  (4)    Design of mechanical systems requiring high precision
                                         fabrication.
                                  (5)    Development of special purpose packa(rin- techniques.
                                  (6)    Systems engineering and inte-ration.
        4                                                         5-4

                                                                                              ALBUQUERQUE
                                                                                                DIVISION
                                                                                                J. L. DICK
                                                                                              General min3get
                              2                          CHIEF                        N
                                                                               DIVISIO                                            DIVISION
STAFF
                                                                             CONTROLLER
                                                         R.M. BLAKNEY        D. R. SUPOWIT                                         W.D.GEORGE
                                      2                                                                                                Matkiger
                Cil
                                                                  &                           ENGINEERING                           PROGRAMS
                                                        AD NSTRATION
                                                         D.R    POWIT
                                                          2                                    R.F.MAYO                             W. D.
HEWITT
                                                               -t-                              Director                              Director
                                                           D"!u
                                                                      APPLILD SCIENC
                                                                              2      Es          ENGINEERING                    ING         A
SCIENCES
                                                                                                                MECH. ENGINEER                 
FIELD TEST
                                                                        OKFARIVINT                                                   F   5AT
                                                                                          3    DEPARTWLNT           DEPARTMENT           
DEPARTMENT           DEPARTMENT
                                                                                                                                             
at-II            JA. to(PAI II

                                  E -1@ertise has been dev loped in the following fields:
                                                        e
                                                                  clear device and induced
                                  1)   Ground Motion Research:  nu
                                       shock propagation, ground motion predictions, and
                                       structural response analysis.
               2                        Analytical Instrumentation Modeling: research and
                                       development in the physical and'mathematical modeling
                                       of specialized nuclear and non-nuclear instrumentation
                                       transducers.
                                  (3)  Data and Information Systems Software Design: high-
                                       volume data handling  requirements  specifications,2  infor-
                                       mation storage and  retrieval,  and  scientific  programming.
                                  (4)  Nuclear Test Studies: conceptual design analysis,
                                       experiment development, and data analyses.
                                  (5)  Nuclear Phenomenology: gamma, neutron, X-ray,
                                       EMP, thermal, blast and shock effects.
                                  (6)  Electromagnetic  Pulse  Simulation  and  Analysis:   Corona
                                       studies, and EMP interactions with electrical and elec.@-
                                       tronic systems and dielectric/conductive envelopes.
                                  This Directorate also provides a capability for the  operation,
                         m',Iiiitenance; engineering modification, and fielding of complex electronic,
                         mec2hanical, electro-optical,  and  photo-optical  instrumentation  systems.
    ;Z,.,                The technolo,aies encompassed include the following systems: timing, RF,
                         Photocrraphic, particulate sampling and dosimetry, servo, line  of  sight
                         pipe diagnostics instrumentation, spectral measurement, and analo
                                                                                          g  a2nd
                         di--, ital data.
                                  The Directorate  maintains  and  operates  a  computer-oriented
                         data reduction facility, which incorporates analog-to-digital conversion,
                         data playback, and conversion of hard copy data and film utilized in  posa
                         trian,-ulation.
                                   This Directorate provides a focal point for all electronic  and
   4                      mechanical technicians  who are supplied to the operating directorates on
                         a programmatic basis. It provides the facilities and  services  of  an  R&D
                                                              5-6

                         Laboratory, a Fabrication Laboratory, a Metrology Laboratory, an
                         mental Test Laboratory, a Model Shop, and a Drafting Section.
                         5. 3. 2    ProoTams Directorate
                                    The Programs Directorate provides the Division -with the caixii)llol
                         for continuity for major programs by ensuring that the most applicable
                         ma2nagement techniques are being supplied and that the program mana-,crq
                             utilizing those personnel -whose talents are best fitted to each pro@,-rl-.
                         are
                         This frees the other directors to administer and develop the resources unc.er
                                         veloponcomingprograms.  TheProgramsDirectorrci)ort-i
                         them and to de
           2              to the Division Manager as to the progress of each program and implen,.c-t-i
                         methods Nvhereby the program's objectives might be more expeditiousl,,-
                         accomplished.
                         5. 3. 3    Administration and Finance Directorate
                                    This Directorate provides administrative and cost support to
                         scientific and technical functions of the 3other    directorates.  It also per4.c.-,@;
                         f inan ial accounting, cost tracking and reporting, property managlmcnt.
                         data processing, and publications support for the Albuquerque Division.
                                                                  .5-7

                                                                                                                                               
APPENDIX A
                                                                                                                                               
RESUMES
                     7,V
                                                                                   7                                                           
77f             "7

                              ri
                                                                             FRANK W. WILCOXSON
                                                                                 Senior Technologist
                                                                                Albuquerque Division
                             EDUCATION
                             New Mexico State University, Mechanical Engineering, 1949 to 1951
                             IC2S, Industrial Engineering, 1949 to 1951
                             EXPERIENCE SUMMARY
                             Mr. Wilcoxson is group leader and head of the EG&G Albuquerque Division
                             Product Design Group responsible for product prototype packaging.  This
                             erroup places emphasis on design for mass production and consequent cost
                             saiin-s in manufacturing new products. Mr. Wilcoxson is also responsi2ble
                             for providin- consultin- support to enoineers regarding electronic packaging,
                             ENT shieldincr systems, and EMP simulator designs.
                             For the past six months, Mr. Wilcoxson has been the senior experimenter
                             on a program to study response of plants to such stimuli as human emotion,
                             i-nental thought transmission to plants, and various plan2t responses to other
                             living creatures such as birds and animals.
                             Previously, Mr. Wilcoxson was a senior technologist and group leader of
                             electronic packaging group responsible for all packaging functions design of
                             E.'L%IP simulator structures, design of EM shielding systems, and all design of
                             optical-mechanical laser systems. He was also responsib2le for bids, pro-
                             posals, and detail designs of classified weapons systems. Systems designed
                             and now operational include the ARES simulator shield system, SAFEGUARD
                             simulator and its associated shield system, rotated EMP simulator built for
                             AFWL at Kirtland AFB, and a shield system for the ALECS simulator at
                             Kirtland Air Force Base.  Earlier, Mr. Wilcoxson2 worked as a technologist
                             responsible for all electronic packaging and shield room designs. Projects
                             rancred from electronic packages built to withstand 100 g shock loads to
                             miniature packages capable of withstanding 5000 g shock loads, light pipe
                             trigger units for shield rooms and boxes, and various packaging of miniature
                             and micro-minia2ture electronic packages. He has also worked as a technical
                             supervisor at EG&G Albuquerque, responsible for electronic packaging and
                             complete drafting department operation.
                             Before joining EG&G, Mr. Wilcoxson was a packaging engineer at the
                             University of New Mexico Physics Department. He was responsible for the
                             design, fabricat2ion, and environmental testing of an optical-mechanical
                             satellite package and an electronic satellite package for use in the OGO and
                             OSO satellite series'. Both units were orbited.
                             He also worked as chief draftsman for the Eberline Instrument Company
                             where he was responsible for all packaging and machine design as well as
                             super-vision of drafti9ng department operations.
                                                                A-2

                                                                                  DR. ROBERTIVL BLAKNE
                                                                                                             y
                                                                                  Chief Scientist
                                                                                  Albuquerque Division
                             EDUCATION
                                  2   iersitv of Rochester, 1955, Physi
                             PliD, Uiii                                cs and Optics
                             BA, Williams College, 1943, Physics
                             EXPERIENCE SUMMARY
                             Dr. Blakney is the Chief Scientist and scientific adviser in optics and electro-optics
                             for the Albuquerque Division. He has approximately 14 years of experience managing
     2                        tnd workina in electro-optics for industry, approximately 6 years in teaching at the
                             Iiisti,-ute of Optics at the University of Rochester, and 3 years as Principal Investi-
                             @:ator in research involving physical measurements of thermal radiation in associa
                             tioii with the study of flash burns.
                             Prior to cominc, to the Alb2uquerque Division, Dr. BLLkney was General Manager and
                             Director of Research and Engineering for the Santa Monica Division of EG&G for 5
                             years, primarily engaged in application of lasers to classified military projects
                             recuirin- prototype design, fabrication, and testing. He also workedwith electro-
                             optical systems, both imaging and non-imaging. Other work included exper2imental
                             research on the effects of atmospheric turbulance on the propagation of optical
                             si-
                               ,nals. He has performed optical systems analyses for many of the projects just
                             described.
                             Prior to his work at EG&G, Dr. Blakney did work -with photographic emulsions and
                             %,orked Nvith solid-state aspects of Xerog2raphic plates. He -was granted patents for
                             Xerographic processes and processes for treating selenium.
                             Dr. Blakney h      merous publications in the electro-optical field and in areas re-
                                          as nu
                             covered by this resume. He is a member of the American Physical Society, the
                             Optical Society of America, and Sigma XL He was President of the Roches4ter
                             Section of the Society for Engineering Education.
                                                                    A-3

                          EDUCATION
                          University of Utah, PhD in Physics, Mathematics Minor, 1956
                          University of Utah, MS in Mathematics, Physics Minor, 1951
                          University of Utah, BS in Mathematics, Physics Minor, 1949. Graduated -xit!t
                                    honors.
                          EXPERIENCE SUMMARY
                          Dr. Morris specializes in plasm2a physics, electro-optics,
                                                                                        and astraphystet.  I!r
                          has been working primarily with electro-optical system design and E.NIP
                          His work includes development of an electro-optic E-field  sensor  for  E.Mil
                          lator applications.  His most recent work is an airborne laser propazation I-%-
                          periment using scintillation to measure atmospheric turbulence at altitude.%
                          from 5 kft to 40 ldt along horizontal paths between two NC-135 aircraft.
                          Previously, he was a senior basic research scientist with Plasma  Phy-e-tc.-t
                          Laboratory, Boeing Scientific  Research  Laboratories,  where  he  conducteti
                          basic researc2h in plasma physics, including laser production and beatina
                          plasmas in and out of a magnetic field.  He constructed a high power pul.-@ets
                          CO laser and an Argon ion laser  for  diagnostics.  He  used  ot         nf
                            2                                                            her kinds
                          routinely for various purposes and conducted other basic research in pla2ilr-"
                          physics, including studies of some astrophysical  plasmas.  He  developld  .1
                          photomultiplier radiometer for detection of radio-frequency intensity mcxU--,c -
                          light signals from plasmas, and a resonance probe apparatus and CxPcri:@:W.--.
                                                                                        2     nci
                          technique for resonance probe measurements at microwave freque
                          also developed a graphical digitizer for direct reading of existing X-Y
                                                                                        ter co
                          digitizing the data for read-in to a computer and replotting af    mPu cr
                          cessing of one or more plots.
                       2   Earlier, as an assistant professor of physics at San Diego State COllecc
                          taught physics courses in eletromagnetic theory, optics,  and ad   c
                          anics.  He also has worked as a staff member at Los Alamos Scit I 'c
                          tory in the Test Division, Group J-12.  He participated in weapons 100-;
                                                                                       2    'qt
                          Eniwetok and Nevada Test Site and worked on development of a f,2-
                          photomultiplier between tests.
                          Dr. Morris also developed several types of electron guns, inclucilr4t
                          types and gas type guns  He developed a fast-beam switching gu.13
                                                                                         e
    2                      beazn-plasma interaction studies, including plasma 0            =
                                                                                scillation
                                                                                          'Ctrc:@
                          rnents and did experimental studies of positive ion focusing Of C"
                                                                                e    He per-lo2r@--
                          cluding holding electron beams together over long rang s,
                          sheet analyses and 'water tank analyses of electron gun co
                          achieve optimum operation.  These var'            ere  used   r"
                                                                lous guns w
                          Of three years to e2dte oscillations in plasmas, etc-
                          Dr. Morris has an ex3tensive number of publications relating to t-I
                          (ap roximately 25.) He is a member of  -the  American  Phyllcli
                          p
                          Xi, and Sigma Pi Sigffia.
                                                               A-4
                                                                 @77

