                      AML
                                                       January 10, 1967
                          Dear Neal:
                                   Enclosed is a short Progress -Report of our work
                         ,.to date.pur.suant to
                                                        Very truly yours,

                                     THIRD PROGRESS REPORT
                                          January-S. 1067
                                        Contract No.

                              SU'.@l't-L4.RY OF ACTN"ITY FOR THE QTJ-XRTER E-.IDI.\G
                              December 31, 1966
                              Contract efforts during this period have been in three areas; literature
                        monitoring, a continuation of efforts to produce an improved piezoelectric
                        generator design, and planning for animal research studies.  The results
                        of acti-.,@ity in these areas af-e surnmariz4d separately below.
                              A.    Literature Review
                                    Many articles of peripheral relevance to this study have beeti
                        scanned.  The sources utilized during this period are largely composed of
                        the Biomedical Engineering Journals and public2ations of NAS.A. and
                        During this quarter                      became a subscriber to the
                        services of the Kno%vledge Availability Systems Center of the University
                        of Pittsburgh. The KASC searchis STA-R and IAA indexes and provides
                                             with documents- relevant to our interests.  Searchine
                        under several descriptors  app2ropriate to this contract began with 1963
                        documents and is n.ow up to date.  Descriptions of recent work of three
                        research groups mentioned in our last -,ormal report are contained in
                        Proceadin,as of the Annual Conference on En-aineering in Medicine :;,nd
                        Biology, 1966.  Th@ report of P. J. Racine and 1-1. L. Massie addressed
                        the pro2blem of determining the chemicall activity present in the Koni'A-off-
                        Reynolds Galvanic Electrode Systeni.  Data from several -netal t),pes in
                        in vitro experiments are discussed, oxidation of electrode metal to its ion
                        and reduction of free oxygen were suggested as principal reactions.  Weii 1-1.
                        [,Co described a prototype "piezoelectric energy con2verter for electronic
                        implarits. " P,.,of-asi.;or I<o concurs %%,ith oui, analysis of the chtracteristics
                        of ceramic bimorplis that resonant operation promises liigher efficiency.
                        Iiis device, which w-.xs not lir-I)latited, utilized Inertial coupling and the
                        proposed energy source was t3lio mcclianical enorgy of he-.irt notion. Pending

                         ontrary data, the mass a.-id gravity limitations of such coupling discussed
                         under Random Motion in our previous r@.@port stM apply.  His voltage doubler
                         rectifi e r circuit should be useful.  The paper by C. C. Enger and M. iclin,
                         "A Three Cram Self -Po%vered Pace-n@,'@-er Tr.-plaLn,-ed or. the Surface of t2he
                         ir,eft Ventricle, " discusses recent work on solring the body fluid leakage
                         problems of the Enger-Johr, H. F-'erLiedy device.
                              B.    Piezoelectric Generator Desi@r_n
                                    The main problem to be overcome by a successfil generator
                         desigr. is coupling the availablr- form of host mechanical energy into 2the
                         Piezoelectric element.  Fluid seals, overau efficiency, breakage, size
                         and weight are some of the aspects of this proglem. -In our previous re-
                         port we offered soine suggestions. apropos pars of this problem, arnong them
                         a striker system which was simila@iz to the operation of a rnusic boc.- The
                         intend-ed performance charact2eristi@'was for i-,iput mechanical energy to be
                         captured in the piezoel,-ctric element Which would subsequently osemate
                         freely until the en@re was all converted into hea-t (mechanical I sses) and
                                                                                        40
                         electricity. Another method of achieving'this characteristic has occurre2d
                         to us .vhich has the, advintage of 'requiring no sliding off the end of the
                         element thus elimi@atiner a possi'ble 'wear point.  The essence of this ne,.v
                         method is to attach a small piece of steel to the Piezoelectric element and
                         use a magnet to deform the element.  When th-3 magnet's holding force is
                         exccejed, the el0ement i§ released and allowed to vibrate freely.  It appears
                         that a pacl@:age similar to those used I)y Dr. ['%'cnnedy but licorporating this
                         -technique could be constructed quite simply. As has been previously
                         discussed, resonant operation should provide rignificantly more electrical
                         output than does "direct" drive.

                                                     -3-
                           C.    Research Ecperimentation
                                 Arrangements have been made wit@, an experienced animal
                     researclier to conduct a fe%v measurements of the source res.stance and
                     power yeeld characteristics from implai-it electrode E.'%,[G signals.
                     U.    PLA.N2TS F'OR THE PEPIOD JA@NUARY I THROUGH FEBRLr@kRY 2tt. 1967
                           Work in the three above areas wiU continue and a final report summarizing
                     both ne%v data and previous reports will be prepared.

