                      APPRAISAL OF TWO REPORTS ON MATHRMATICAL ANALYSES
                                          OF I-IEAD liq:URY
                                            31 January 1972
 -----------

                             APPRAISAL OF TWO RRPO.RTS ON MATI-i-@MATICAT- ANAT-YSI-:S
                                                      OF IlrAD INJURY
                       Two   papv-rs concern(,d with rnathernitical modeling of head injury dy-naml ics ha%,c@,
                       been submitted ror biomedical appraisal.    1, 2Ecth reports define rnathernat2ica-I
                       models of pressure-acceleration dynamics inside the skull during impact @vent@;
                       by assuming that:
                                   (I) The skull is a thin, isotropic, ho-nogerious, elastic.
                             spherical shell.
                                   (2) The brain is an ideal cornprrssibl-e fluid.
                                   (32) All impact loading is axisyn-imetric.
                       Referi-nce I considers the cavitation hypothesis of brain damage for head
                       impact,, and as.5urnes a specific impacting load in addition to appropriate
                       constants to define the primary assumptions  noted  above.  The  evolved  model
                       uses extensional shell theory and coupled differential oquations solved by
              2         finite difference.techniques to define the tirne-variable pressure field inside
                       the shell.  The authors feel that their model supports the cavitation hypothesis
                       because the model indicatea trans;.ent zones of negative pressure at the impact
                       pole and the opposite (contrecoup) pole at different times after the start of
                       irnpact. The authors acknowledge th2at their work does not  verify  the  cavita-
                       t.@on hypothesis and does not rule out other mecharisrns of brain damage from
                       non-penetrating impact.
                       Reference 2 considers the pressure effects of various  inipacting  force  wave-
                       forms in zelation to the previously proposed General  Motors'  Severity  index. 2. 3
                       The Severity Index is an nth power of impact acceleration, or force,  integra.-
                       ted with respect to time for the'duration of impact. Brief positive pulses of
                       impact fo'rce in square, triangular, half sine and eccentric waveforms were
                       defined so as to have identical Severity Inde-.$E values, ir.Ld@cating that all the
                       ptilses had roughly sirriilar products of average amplitude times du8ration.

                                                                                              Ask
                              MF
                          Tjio fuur. puls(-s were used as inputs to ti-ic niatlici-natic  i,.iodcl  tic,scribecl
                          ;tbovq, a-icl ttic n-&Odet showt!(l t2hat t[ic pressure dy7tiamics ,)f tll(! physical
                          systen-i would be "nearly the sii-ne" for all pulses tested.  From this fiiiding,
                          the alltlior,.A conclucle, "These results inclicate ilia- il-le  C,cnzrtl  1-iiitc@rs'
                          SeveriLy ln(lex is a useful means oA' cictcrrninit-ig the sc-verity of vastly diilxt.@nt
                          ptilse.-.% applic(i in linear syrlen-is. "  Tlio itit)-torq go on to citiiioi-k. liowc-vcr,
                          that "t2hese results (lo not necessarily indicate thal the Severity ln(lex is a
                          -.,alid means of predicting the hazard or injury potential of Iific-rent pulses.
                          An evaluation such as tIlaL n-iust be accomplished @)y furtiicr experiniciatation
                          and clinical investigations
                                        12.  The  two  papers  appear  to  be   ingerkious   examples   of   ana-
                                 lytical modeling technique applied to the complex dynamics of fluid
                                 filled spherical shells subjectei@ to impact.
                                        Z.  Reference  I   shows   that,   uncler   the   asgtimcd   conditions,
                                 transient  negative pressures will occur at both the impact and contrt--2
                                 coup poles of tlie impacted shell.
                                        3.  Reference  2  shows  t]-iat,  under  the   assurned   conrlitio-.is,
                                 similar impact forces (differing mainly in wavefori-n) selected
                                 to have identical General Motors' Severity Indices will cause sim-41ar
                                 dynamic pressure patt2erns.
                                        4.  It is unfortunate   that neither report mentions the det-tilud
                                 results   of   Lindgren   who   measured   the   dynamic   pressure   pitle-rns
                                 of fluid filled spheres and human cadaver heads subjecled to irnpacl.
                                 Lirclgren  recorded   negative   pressures   at   both   the   contrecoup   and
                                 impact  pole.-;,  as  well  as  similar  press--ire  patterns   arisin,,   from
                                 rirnilar ii-npac:t forces.
                                        S.  With regard to the concussion Lhresholci problem, it would
                                 be'extremely interesting to see the powerful analytic echniques of
                                 Reference I and 2 used in a retrospective s-2arch for a useful common
                                 der-orriinalor  in  a  large  number  of  the   published   investi-ations   on
                                 experimental concussion.

                         qp
                                                                     11 I MOB
                                                     REFERENCES
                      1.   Bon2dict, J. V.  Harris, E. 1-1. and von Rosenberg, D. U.   "An An4-
                                 lytical lilvestigation of Lhe Calvitation 1-.ypotli--!sis of Braii-i
                                2 Dan-iage, " Journal of 13.xs,.c=gEjlia2aliaa, September 1970,
                                 pp 597-603-. (LJNCL)
                      2.    'be-iedict, J. V. md Lin, D. J. , "Analytical [nvestination of the
                                                                               0
                                 General Motors' Severity Index, " ASME Pub2lication 71-WA/
                                 BI-IF-6, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, New York,
                                 1971. (UNCL)
                      3.   Cadd, C. W.   "Use of a 'A"ci-hted-Impulse C:-iterion for rstirnating
                                 Injury Hazard, " in Proci:edings of the Tenth S',@inp Ca.zl Crash
                                 Confer2erice, Society of Automotive Engineers, New York, 1966,
                                 pp 95- 100. (UNCL)
                                             "Experixnentat Studies of Mecha
                      4.   Lin6gron, S. 0.                                   nical Effects in
                                 I-lead Injury, " Acta Chi-rur&ilca Scandinavica Supplement 360,
                              7   1966, pp I- 100. (UiNCJ@)
                                                           -3-

