                   PHYSIOLOGICAL INIC-CHANISNISP ANALYSIS AND BEHAVIORAL
                       SIGNIFICANCE OF THE ELE, CTRODERMAL RESPONSE
                                              -----------
                                      FINAL REPORT

             Section
                                                                                                 Page
               10
               12         Va-sclilar P-ffects UPON Skin Potential
                                                                                                  82
               13        References                                                              89

                     P@IYSIOLOGICAL i%IC-CHAiNIS.\IS, Ai\tALYSIS Ai\'D BE'-IAVIORAL
                         SIGNIFICANCI',, OF q-@IE ELECTRODERNi4NL RESROLNSE-
             1.    LNTRODUCTIOIN
                   This project was directed toward exploration of physiological mechanisms
             underlying the electrodermal response 2in the hopes of establishing a rational basis
             for quantitative treatment of this measure as a behavioral indicant. A further
             objective was to gain a better understanding of the adaptive function of electrodermal
             activity. It was presumed that the role of such activity in our "psychological" life
             can be understood if such behavior is regarded as essentially a biological adaptation,
             modified to fit a social struc2ture. Thus, if electrodermal activity is associated with
             profuse palmar sweating, and this can be shonvn to be defensive in function, one has
             grounds for interpreting such activity as a sign of fear or anxiety. U, on the other
             hand, other forms of electrodermal activity facilitate manipulation or exploration,
             one would put an entirely different interpretation on its apfearance.  For example, if,
             i2n a situation whic[-l is potentially threatening, one notes evidence of the manipulative
             type of electrodermal activation, it would seem appropriate to conclude that ihe subject
             is engaged in copl-ig behavior ratj-,ier than that he is beset with alarm.
                    The first Fortion of this three-year program was devoted primarily to pliysiological
             investigations. -An assortment of evidence, covered in the interim reports, hel4ped to
             round out the partially elaborated physiological model of the electrodermal system.
             Among these experiments were microelectrode observations on sweat ducts and the
             areas ben,@een the ducts, confiriination of potential responses from the nail bed, study
                                                         fiirthe-r examination of the effect of s-pecific

                                                      2
             elcctrolytes on o'leerrodermil responses, and finally continu ing studies on the sweat
                              L
             real)sorption mechanism and its reflex control. These v;@-rious findings, when
             integrated witli other experimental evidence, lead to the formulation of a model in
             which sweat reabsor2ption played a prominent role and Lft which such activity was
             reflected in the recovery limb of the skin conductance or resistance response.
                     According to this model the sweat g),Ia.nd has a dual function; if it secretes
              profusely, the skin surface becom.--s well-hy&ated and resilient and is thus protected
              against abrasion. In a biological sense the animal is now able to scamper over the
      2        rough ground away from danger without undue mechanical damage to his contact
              areas. For fine manipulation, 'however, as may be involved in e,.cploration and
              -assessment of cbjects in the immediate surrounds, tactile requirements are such
              that the optimum level of surface moisture is somewhere intermediate between dry
              and wet. It was supposed that reoulation of surface mofsture at light to moder2ate
               hydration is largely a function of the activity of the sweat reabsorption mechanism.
               Observation of conditions under which reflex sweat reabsorption occurs led to the
               conclusion that this mechanism goes into action in preparation for "manipulative"
               tasks. This activity is reflected in increased positive-go:ing'skin potential responses
               and in acceleration of recovery of conductance responses.
                       2The major effort of this investigation was then directed to@vard the elaboration
                of this recovery lin-Lb measure, in terms of its measurement, its relation to amplitude, t(
                conductance level, and to behavioral state, and to the comparison of its discriminating
                strength with -:hat of other electrodermal measures. 'niis report summarizes progress
                to date. It is broken into a series of separate topics related to these ob1jectives.
                                                              in -qc ,inn-rnnriate to render as complete a

                    AdeL
                                                       3
              picture as possible widiiii this report. One full-length ptpcr, "'nie information con-
              tent of the recovery limb of dic clcctrociermal response" (in press) has been in part
              supported by this contract and is included as part of :his final report since it summarizeo--
       2       the approach and findings in an optimal nianncr.
                     Ii@ addi@ion to the val:ious sections on the 'recover@ limb, there is one on the
              relation of vascular changes to skin potential shifts at the surface. Although some of
              this material was described in an interim report, it has nonv beei-i completed and com-
              posed as an integrated manuscript to be submitted for publication, and Is, 6therefore,
              included in toto in d-iis report.

                                                      4
           2.      SU,\I,\IARY Or@' R-LNDINGS
                   Scvcral iiietliods of nicasuring the recovery rate of an clec:trodcrrnal respoiisp-
           have been assessed and compared. Tticse include several manual methods and one
            electronic measure, all matficinatically derived from a,treatm2ent of tllc expon(.,nti@l
            curve. All suffer from uncertainty witli regard to the asymptotic level approached
            by the exponential portion of the recovery limb. One method of coping with this
            difficulty is to use a logarithmic writeout in which case the slope of  the  recovery  limb
            is an easily measured characteristic which is  proportional  to  recovery  rate  and  inde-
            pendent of the necessity 2for deciding where the asymptotic level is.  Fven then, this
            holds true only ff --he asymptotic voltage is zero, a situation which may be  artff  ically
             produced by the use of capacitance coupling. For analysis of recovery rate of standard
             DC recordings by manual.techniques, the  "D".  measure  is  the  method  of  choice.  This
             is a simple measurement, along the extended  baseline,  of  the  distance  intercepted  by
      2       the altitude of the response and its  steepest  recovery  slope.  This  measure  was  used
             for much of the behavioral study reported here. An elecr-ronic method usina analog
              computation of maximum slopes of the  ascending  and  descending  linibs  of  a  response
              was highly accurate for "clean" responses, but suffered gross inaccuracies whenever
              the ascending limb was composed of nvo or more slurre      d components.2 Another method
              which should lend itself readily to automatic on-line computation is the amplitude-slope
               method, but this has not yet been tested electronically.
                      -An examination of the feasibility of using  capacitance-coupled  recordings  for
               calculation of recovery rate shows that such a  procedure  is  acceptable  provided  one
               uses a (-oupling time constant of 6 seconds or loncer.  This procedure 5reduces the
                                                                           Iii@l-ilir rn.--related. At a

                                                          5
               coupling time constant of 10 seconds, the loss of sensitivity becomes negli-Lble for
               all but the very slowest recovery limbs.
                      Recovery rate was found to be capable of distinguishing between many be-
               havioral states, even when response amplitude or resp6nse frequency2 could not.
               lhus, to name a fenv, it distinguished: orienting responses to a light flash from
               responses to the same flash when it took on signal properties, responses to arL
               alerting signal from those to a task-execution signal, the resting state from various task
               situations, mirror  tracing  from  back-viard  counting  or  cold  pressor  exposure,  problem
               solving from perceptual or psych2o-motor behavior, a deception task from a reaction
               time task. In the course of these comparisons it was found that recovery rate be-
               came slower with habituation, even in a deception task, a--id that it was also slo@,,ed
               by the entry of a 'Lric,,rht stimulus into a task situation. It failed to distinguish a decep-
               tive response from a non-deceptive  response  in  a  given  series  of  queries  when  d2iffer-
               ences were compared across the entire population, but individual- subjects did frequently
               show a difference. The design of this experiment was unfortunately aimed at group
               analysis and the @.iumber of deceptive responses for  a  given  subject  was  insufficient  to
               evaluate this individual effect statistically.
                      An overview of the effect of the various task and stimulus situations upon electro--
   1            dermal recovery rate  indicates  that  acceleration  of  recovery  reflects  mobilization  'or
               goal-oriented performance.  That the de     termining factor was not general activation
               per se was evidenced by the slow recovery accompanying a cold pressor exposure,
               shonvn by other electrodermal  indicants  to  be  as  activating  as  were  performance  tests
               associated with rapid recovery.

                                                    6
                  The recovery measure for a given individual in a standard situation was
            slion-m to be relatively stable over a pei:iod of 5 consecutive week-$. There were large
            characteristic individual differences bctxveen individuals even though they changed in
            the same direction when changing behavioral conditions.  Efforts to find a behavioral
            trait associated wit@-1 recovery rate were generally unsuc@essful although fast recovery
            in a standard task (reaction time) wag found to be associated with low anxiety (SAQ),
            and with a tendency to maintain electrodermal response withoiit habituation during
            a reaction time series. This was seen as further evidence supportiri,g the interpreta-
            tion o'L fast reco2very as reflecting mobilization for goal-dlrected behavior, since these
            same subjects 1-iabituated to a series of non-signal tones just as fast as did subjects
            with slow recovery rate.  IE is still uncertain as to whether the difference in recovery
            rate bet@veen problem solving and simple perception indicat@@s a specific difference in
            the effects of coanitive and perceptual behaviors on recovery, or whether this simply2
            means  that the problem-so-lving task was associated with higher anxiety.
                   An examination of the relationship of recovery rate to other parameters of the
            response sho@ved it to have a low negative correlation with amplitude, that is, responses
            of higher amplitlde in a given behavioral state tended to have slightly slower recovery,
            When measured benveen different behavioral states, ho@v2ev--r, there was,often a tendency
            for the reverse to be true. In vie@v of the evidence showing that mobill@ation for ,:,oal-
            directed behavior 4-s associated with faster recovery, this observation probably reflects
            the fact that mobilization for task performance frequently causes an increase in activation
            resulting in electrz)dermal responses of high amplitude. This same consideration probably
 4           e,xplains the fact that recovery rate is related (positively) to skin conductance level in

                                                        7
                     During tllc course of a comparison of the discriminating strength of the
              recovery rate measure with otlier clectroe@ert'nal nicasures, a new frequency measure
              was devised. 'Il-is measure is diffcrcnt from other measures of !'GSR frequency" or
              ficouiit" in that it examin2es, for any given task or epoch, not the total number of re-
              sponses but rather the maxiniun-L frequency displayed in a "burst" of three consecutive
              responses. This measure, termed f max, demonstrated a surprising strength in
              distinguishing bet-@veen stimulus conditions,, althou,,,,,h not the same conditions as were
              distinguished by recovery race.  Thus  f  max  distinguis2hed  the  deceptive  response  from
              listening to instructions, but recovery rate was not able to do so.  Contrari@vise,
               recovery rate d'.stiiio,,liislied perception from problem so'.,ving while f max did not.
               The higi-iest. f max and the fastest recovery rates were both found during the reaction
               time test, but the level of f ma:K reached by any subject during this task, unli@2-e recovei:y
               rate,. bore no relation to his trait anxiety.
                       A companion  study, one directed at the physiological basis of skin potential
               levels and changes, demonstrated  that  a  one  minute  engorgement  of  cutaneous  vessels
               produces a slow negative shift and upon release of the cuff a sudden positive shift.
                With arterial occlusion these potential shifts were opposite in direction and2a,-reater  in
                magnitude. Although changes were generally not over 0.5 mv they raise the possibility
                that vasomotor responses may be accompanied by surface potential waves. Whether
                these shifts were mediated by an effect of the vascul,@r state on sweat  gland  potentials
                or whether they represent changes in vascular potentials remains to be determined.

                                                       8
                                            'TT OF ELECTRODE-r,,,\4AL Pf-,'COVERY PATE-:
              3.     ON TIIE \IEASUREi%,IE,',,
                     RATIONALE@
                                                                                           in several
                      The measurement of clectrodermal recovery rate may be approached
                                                                     'tliere is an intrinsic recovery
              ways, all of which have in common the assumption that
              rate characteristic which may be the same for waves of greatly varying amplitudf,.s.
               An example of such a condition is that for the exponeitial curve in which a characteristic
               time.constant or rate constant may be common to all mz!ni2bers of a family of curves of
               different amplitudes. Darrow (1937) concluded that the recovery limb of the skin
               resistance resoonse (SRR) is exponential in form, and additional evidence, to be pre-
               sented here, supports ttxis interpretation.
                       Methods for evaluating the rate constant of the electrodermal recovery limb are
                suggested from examination of the differential equation describing the exponenti2al rela-
                tion. Tne process described by this relation is one in which a variable changes at
                a rate, dE/dt, which at any instant is a linear function of the magnitude of that variable.
                Thus, for the case-of voltage chanoe in a condensor discharge.
                 which may signify, for example, that the voltage drops by 5c7 per second, in which case
                                                                       1     /0
                  .05 is the constant characteristic of such a process.
                  Rate Constant
                         The Lntegral of the above expression provides the common exuression for
                  exponential decay, namely

                                                  9
            Nvhere E0 is die starting lc%,cl and E is instantancous voltage at tine, t; k is the rate
            constant (rc). If E is decaying to zero as its asymptote,
                                              4@
            3)
            When t   1/k, 2   Fol   that is, it equals 37% of its original value. This t2ime, which
                                  e
             is equal to the reciprocal of the rate constant, is called --he time constant (tc) and,
             like the rate con stant, is characteristic of the process and independent of amplitude.
             All curves having this same characteristic regardless of their starting point may be
             superimposed upon  the.same large exponential curve. Thus, to the extent that the
             electrodermal recovery jimb2 is exponential, it may be matched to an exponential
             curve of the same rate constant. This is the basis of the use of an overlay method
             for determining the time constant by curvc.mitching as described in section 6.
             Half-Time
                    From equation (2) it can be shonvr,@ that decay half-time, that is, the time taken
             for decay to become 500,70 completed, is equal to 0.7 tc and is a cons2tant for all waves
              having the same time constant, independent of th eir amplitude. This measure, the
              recovery half-time, represents a second means of expressing recovery r-,te and is
              also described in section 6.
                     Equation (2) represents a means of determining the degree to which the -recovery
              lin-ib fits an exponential curve. Fxpressed in common logarithmic form,
          1     4)

                                                   10
        from @vllict, it fOIIO%vs :Iiat a @vritcout having lo.-al:itliiiiic vcrtical compi:cssio-,i should
        give for exponential curves a strai-lit line N'@IIOSC SIOI)C is a - k/2.3. Tbc upper trace
         in Figure I is a writeout of an exponontial curve obtained by c2apacitor discharge ind    I
         a recording of a fe,%v skin conductance responses. 13ascline of the skin conductance
         trace has been adjusted so that responses  are  recoverin(,  to  approximately  zero  voltage.
         Below are the same waves recorded through a logarithmic cor-ipression circuit.  Note
         that the portion of the recovery limb which is exponential in form starts about one
         sec2ond after response peak-. The slope of the linear portion of the logarithmic
          recovery limb is proportional to the rate constant provided the asymptotic voltage is
          zero. Since this is not so, such a method  cannot  be  used  dir-actly.  One  may,  honvever,
          apply the second derivative to achieve this end.
                  -The time derivative of equation (1) is
                               C2/
           which may be w3@itten,.
2
                               4..
            Integrating,
            which indicates tl-tat the first derivative of an exponential curve is also exponential  as
            is its second deri-,@ative.  The slope of the log-compressed wri-,eout of the first
             derivative is then proportional to k and unlike the case for the primary (DC) write-
             out, the curve, as required, decays to%vard zero because  of  the  cauacitativ1e  couplino@
                                                 olf--c--rronic coavcrsion.  Since

                                                    loa
                    'CAP
                                                                   s c
                                                       1
               Figure 1. Upper trace:  direct writeout of a condensor discharge (CAP) and skin
               conductance trace (SC). Paper speed I mm/sec. Lower trace: same as upper
               but with logari--hmic compression1.
                Figure 2. Diagram   of method for me@@surin(r the rate zonstant by tan A/H.

                                  O/ -LL                     2, '3
                 one is tempted to produce a writeout of d log E'/dt to obtain an amplitude reading
                 directly proportional to ti-ie rate constant. Unfortunately, d log E//dt often has such
                 a low magnitude in the exponential portion of the recovery limb that its analog form
                 cannot serve reliably as the expression for the2 rate constant. A similar problem
               .arises if one attempts to determine the rate constant from the loa-compressed first
                 derivative curve (loc, d E/dt) by manual measurement of the tancent of the acute
                 angle produced betnveen the linear portion of the recovery limb, and baseline.
                 Second Derivative
                       Yet another method may be    derived from the second derivative form.  From
                 eq2uation
                 'Ehus, one may determine the recovery rate constant by calctilatin- at any point on the
                 recovery limb the quotient of the second derivative   the first derivative. In practice
                 the method is not too feasible because ti;,-- magnitude of E& is so low in the exponential
                 region of the recovery limb that it frequently is exceeded by the noise level of the
                 t-race, which becom2es rather high for the analog second derivative.
                 Amplitude-Slope Method
                        Another solution is one which requires an amplitude measure as well as a slope..
                 From equaticn (1), it is seen that

                                                            12
                                                                                       ression.  rrom it.,
                the slope of E, or its first dcrivative.  'Iliis is a most use).Ul cxp
                one can obtain the value for k by taking the slope and amplitude of any point On the
                exponential portion of the decay (Figure 2). 'llic slope  is  tan  A.  Tn  practice  it  must
                be chosen at a point at or beyond the inflection point on the recovery limb. Because a
                measurement of wave amplitude would  seem  to  be  more  precise  and  because  such  a
                 measurement could be used independently as an index of responsivity, a test was
                 made of the relation of H to h (Figure 2), i.e., of peak amplitude to the amplit2ude at
                 the inflection point, 'Die product-moment correlations for  20  responses  on  each  of
                 6 subjects were: .97, .99, .99, .99,       .99, and .96. 'Ibus a convenient substitute
                 measure for &,c rate constant is
                 6)
                  This method showed a correlation of 0. SI with measurements made by the template
                  method on the same 66 responses. In mak2ing the slope measurement, a line is drawn
                  parallel to the recovery lin-ib at its inflection point. The acute angle at the intersection
                  of this line with the horizontal is measured and its tar,.-ent obtained from tables       Anothe
                  relation in conjunction with this method pertnits a relatively simple approach to auto-
                   mated calculation of the rate constant. The peak slore of the ascendina- 2lin-Lb is found
                   to be linearly related to the maximum amplitude of the primary writeout (Edelberg, 196,
                   A validation check of this relationship in the present investigation confirmed  this.
                   Measurement of 44 responses having uncomplicated ascending limbs gave a correlation
                   of 0.94 benvee-ri the nvo measures. Hence one may substitute for H the maximum first
                    derivativ5e o-' the- ascendincr lin-Lb, and for tan A the maxi@-inum first deri,,,ative of the
                                                                                                  c;pnaratelv

                                                          13
                 4.     ON THE \IC- ASURE.\IEiN'T OF ELECTRODE- r,,,\IAL RECOVI,:RY RATE BY
                        PRE- FERRE- D ,\,IE, T@@"ODS: TESTI',\G ALND CO,@,IPARISON
                 A) Lo,-aritlim4.c Compression
                        In the discussion of the various        of2 computing clectrodermal recovery
                 rates it was stiown that the first derivative of the logarithmic writeout of the recovery
                 lin-Lb is directly proportional to the rate constant. This is true when logarithmic com-
                 pression is accomplished by electronic means, but only if the wave is rec@)vering to
                 a zero voltage level. In such cases, the reaion of the recovery lin-Lb immediately
       2          following the peak (by about 1 second) is linear, and it is this portion which should
                 reflect the ratz! "constant. " Unfortunately the DC- recorded trace  rarely  recovers to
                 zero voltage as its asymptote. Since the first derivative does have essentially a zero
                 voltage asymptote, logarithmic compressiotl of such a writeout should offer a linear
                 section of the recove.7y lim-b whose slooe i2s proportional to the rate constant. LJn-
                 fortunately, &.e electronically -differentiated recovery slope is often of such low
                 amplitude that log compression and manual measurement pose a problem in accuracy.
                        It has been shown, however, (Section 5) that the rec,@very rates of electrodermal
                 responses recorded with capacitance coupILno- are highly correlated with those computed
         2        from a DC record provided the coupling has a time constant of 6 seconds or lono-er.
                 Such condenscr-coupled records do approximately  satisfy  the  requirement  that  the
                 asymptotic voltage is zero.  If a record of this kind is subjected to logarithmic com-
                 pression, the recovery limbs should show a linear portion whose slope is proportional
                 to the rate constant (Figure 3).  This study examined su5ch records to determine the
                 degree to whiz-h the rate measure, computed from t@,eir slopes were correlated @vith the

                                                                     ...........                                                               
cd      @.4
                                                                                                  2                                            
Qj
                                                                                                                                               
2                                                                         14
                                                                                                                                               
Ef)
                                                        2                                                                                      
Cd      r
                                                                                                                                               
2                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                               
I   pit
                                                                                  2                                                            
bo
                                                                                                                                               
0
                                                                                              2                                                
ID
                                                                                                                                               
4                                                                                              r,4

                                                                            w
                                                     14
                                                  Mctliod
              Instrumentation
                   Skin cotiductaiice was recorded on a Beckman Dyno&,raph with direct coupl-
              ing (channel 1). The pen (1) output was coupled to the 2 mcgohrii input of another DC
              channel throug2h a 3-microfarad condcnsor to obtain the 6-second time constant, The
              pen (2) output of this second channel was placed in series with a 220 K resistor and a
              -silicon diode (Texas Instruments G-129). The voltage developed across the diode is
              a logarithmic. representation of. the pen (2) output (Kahn, 1962). This voltage was fed
              iito a third channel of the Dynograph and, with zero input into channel2 (1), and the
              recording completely restored to baseline, the zero position of pen 2 was adjusted
              until the voltage across the diode was for-ward biassed by 3.25 volt.' Polarity was
              arranged so tliat an electrodermal response produced increasing forward bias on the
              diode.
              ,Measuriiia- Techniqu
                    A straight line is drawn parallel to the linear portion of the recove-2ry slope in
              the region immeb-ately after the peak of the response (Figure 4). On can then
              measure the acute angle (A) which this line makes with the horizontal, and obtain
              its tangent from tables. This value. is directly proportional to recovery rate constant.
              An alternative method is to use the L-shaped scale shown in Figure 4. 'The vert,,,al
              limb is set so that it passes through the intersection1 of &-e slope with the upper edge
              of the paper channel. The horizontal distance from this point to the intersection of
              the slope with the bottom edge of the paper channel can be read dirdct ly off the metric
              scale on the foot of the L. Since t,@n A is proportional to the rate constant, 1/tan A
                                                                                 iq ,i ronstant).

                                                      "la
                   Upper edge of
                      Scale
                   Bottom edge of
                      Scale
                                                              1         2         3,
               Figure 4. Measurement of recovery rate by measurement of anale A or intercept d.

            Also,  since  tan  A  Ii/d where H is the scale heiglit and d i@i the liorizontal distance
            measured, J r                            Since H and b are constants, d is directly pro-
                             +,4 vi A
            portional to the tirr-c constant.
                                                      Results
                     The recovery time constants of 66 r2es@---nses recorded on magnetic tape were
             read by the electronic method described in Section 4C.  This method consists of
                                       'tive and peak negative first derivatives of the electrodermal
             meas'uring the peak pos-,
             response and dividincr one by the other. The same populat-'-on of responses %vas sub-
             jected to the template measurement (Section 6), t2o the amplitude-slope method
             (H/tan A), and also to tffe locr-compressed AC recording as described here.  Produrt-
             moment correlations were determined between the values obtained by the logarithmic
              method and those from the three other methods.  Values were as follows:
                               Log/ E'           v,3. electconic computer               0.59
                               lx2g t E           vs. amplitude-slope                    0.87
                               Logi E            vs. template                           0.86
               The range of d in the log method was 3 to 47 mm which corresponds to an 8:1 range
               in time constants.  The correlation of the log measure ,vith response amplitude was
               like many of the other measures  low  and  positive  (r  =  0.37,  R  -<.01).
       2                Because of the simplicity of the manual measurement involv@-,d in the measure-
                          0                      because of its independence from laiowled,,a
                ment of  loaf  E,  and  especially                                             ,e of baseline
                level, this seems to be a measure of ctioice.  It has one &aw-back, namely the neces-
                                                            6                      nt-inn in n@)r,-LiTiing its

                    AMN,
                                                        16
               B) N,"icasuremcnt of the Altitudc-SIOI)c Intci:cct)t Aloi,.rr f@aseline
                                                                                   leads to yet  another
                      The notation H/tan A, that is, the amplitude-slope measure,
               approac2h to time constant measurement. In Figure 5 it is seen  that  tan  A  is  approxi-
               mately equal to H/D where D is the distance along  the  dxtended  baseline  included  be-
               tnveen the altitude aine @1) and the extension of the recover-I limb slope. As a  result,
               H/tan A reduces approximately to D. The measurement  of  D  in  practice  is  not  unlike
               the task of measuring t/2, the time for half 2recovery, but it has the  advanta-e  that  D
               is about 75c7 larger than.t/2 and, therefore, incurs a smaller relative error in measure.-
                          /0
               ment.  Furthermore,  it  allows  measurement  of  a  considerable  number  of   responses
               which fall to recover by @O@'7 prior to the onset of the subsequent response.
                                           /0
                       To test -.he u2sefulness of this method the values of D were measured for the
               same 66 responses used to compare the other methods.  Values of D ranged from 1.2
               to 8 secon&-. Because the paper speed was only 1 mm/second, measurement was
                not very precise, but the correlation with the measurements obtained by H/tan A was
                neve-,-@ll,@--@3less 0. 90, and with those obtained with the curve-matching 2method, 0. 82.
                Correlation with the electronic method was 0.63 and w,'-th log/ E 0.86. At a somewhat
                higher paper speed, e.g., 2 to 2,5 mm/second, this  is  a  very  satisfactory  r@iethod,
                especiauy since the value of 1), when expressed in seconds, can be readily converted
                 to the time constant by the use of a constant factor. The use of  a  standard  notation
                 i6s highly desirable in making comparisons between results at different laboratories,
                 and the use of the time constant or rate const-,int seems a reasonable choice for such
                 standardization. To derive the conversion factor for 0, one  must  keep  L-i  mind  the
                  fact that in precise terms, tc = h/Tan A wl-Lich is equal to d in Figure 5.  From this

                                                     16a
                                                     e
                 Fi,o-ure S. Veasurement of recovery rate by altiwde-slope intercept, D.

                                                17
                                               o r'           -  --------
           Measurements on 40 responses gave a mean value of 0.74 for h/H + c, whence
           7)                         O.
                  To convert H/tan A to tc, one must consider the re"-ation of H/tan A to
           h/Tan A. Since
                                         a- ti  A      H              2A
           the conversion factor h/H must be determined. Calculations of h/H from 20 responses
           on each of 6 subje.:ts gave mean values of:
                                                0.84
                                                0.86
                                                0.76
                                                0.84
                                                0.89
                                                0.85
                                                0.84
            From this
                                                         H
            8)                -LL              O,
                                                        -t -Dill A
                   'Ihe acrreement of these two relations were tested on 65 respons es, with results
            as follows:
             ,Notation                                   Factor                 4  Comt)uted te
             D                  2.70                     0.74                      2.00 seconds
             H/tan A            2.34                     0.84                      1. 97 seconds

                                                                                          0
                This agreciiient is surprisingly close and gives confi(.Icnce in tile reliability if not
                the -validity of these measures.  'nicir agreement N,.'itil tc values obtained by curve-
                matching  is  not  nearly  as  impressive,  the  mean  of  that  measure   being   2.529   seconds.
                The possible cause of this discrepancy is described bcl'ow.
                The Positio a of the  Asymptotic  Level  and  Its  Effect   upon   Recover-v   Rate   %Icasurement
                        All methods    described,  whether  curve-matchin-,   t/2,   D,   or   H/tan   A,   depend
                for their validity upon the accurate choice of the asymptotic level to which the exponea-
               2 tial portion of the recovery limb is decayincr.  The only exceptions to this are cases
                in which E '/E// or d aoc, F,)/dt are used to determine tc.  In the other four measures,
                the conducta  nce or resis  tance level at point of response onset has been used as the
                asymptote, but it is clear from inspection that in numerous cases such an assumption
                is erroneous.  Uncertainty  as  to  the  lev2el  of  the  asymptote,'  and  in  fact  a  systematic
                error in estimating it may explain the fact that recovery rate is found to have a
                correlati-on with response amplitude.  This correlation though low is consistent for
                different methods of measurement and is significant.  Examples of the correlation
                for measures on the same population of 65 responses are:
                                                                              r2                    p
                                  Amplitude vs. Electr(,,-..;Ic tc           .37              <.Ol
                                  Amplitude vs. Template tc                  .35              <.Ol
                                  Amplitude vs. log E                        .37              <.Ol
                          True  asymptotic  level  may  be  determined  in  the  following  way.  In  4 Figure   6,
                 tan(-,ents to the recovery lin-Lb have been dra@,in at points  I  and  2.  It  has  been  shon@-n
                  Pirlit-r that the time  constant of an expone,,itial curve = h/tan A or  d  in  Fi,-,lrc  5.  If

<<OCR Error  --  Unable to read TIFF image>>
                                                    19
            from either point should be identical. 7lic correct asymptotic level will be that at
            which di = d
                       2'
                  When this method was applied to a nun-Lber of skin conductance responses, the
            asymptotic level was found to vary, sometimes falling 41.most on the baseline, but -
            more often considerably above it, oc2casionally near the pea'.%- of Ulle wave. As a
            consequence, the values for tc calculated from curve-matching, t/.2, D or H/tan A,
            are usually too laege, but since all are altered in the same direction by this effect,
            the inter-correlations are not seriously disturbed.  Moreo,,,er the error introduced
            after conversion of eidier D or H/tan A to tc is the same, hence the  agreement  of
          2  the mean time constants obtained from these t@vo measures. Such is not the case for
            the curve-matching technique. In this case the error is  considerably  greater  and
            is a likely e,-,.planation for the discrepancy shown in the previous section. Since the
            other methods are less subject to this error, it argues in favor of the abandonment
            of curve matching in favor of D, H/tan A, or t/2. Since me@Lsurement of D a2llows
            measurement of more responses than does t/2 and  entails  no  more  work  than  for
            t/2 and less work than for H/tan A, it is considered the method of choice. More-
            over, it is faster than curve matching, requires less training, and the one judl-ement
                                                                                            0
            to be made, namely the placin- o f a straight edoe parallel to the recovery linib at its
            steepest point is a simpler one than is curve fitting.
                   To reiterate, the most advantageous mediod for measurement of tc is to
            measure D, using the conversion:
                    tc = 0.74 D

                                                       20
               or, for rate constant:
                           1.35
                      rc
                      It will be recalled that LNvo alternative metliods for measurement of recovery
               rate are inherently independent of any knowledge of baseline or asymptote. The
               first of these is E/Ell , i.e., the ratio of the first to second derivative at any2
               point on the exponential portion of the recovery limb. The difficulties with this
               approach have already been discussed. It does -,iot appear to be feasible at this
               time. The seccnd alternative, d aog E)/dt, that is, the slope of the linear portion
               of the logarithmically-compressed recovery lin-Lb does appear useful, but only with
               a condensor-coupled recording and,,,iith loa-com2pression circuitry.
               C) Electronic Computation
                      As discussed in Section 3 the notation H/tan A forms the'Dasis of an approach
               to automatic on-line calculation by an analog computer. The analoo- approach takes
               advantage of the high linear relation of the peak first derivative of the ascendino, limb
               of the DC elect:rodermal recording and          amplitude of the wave (Pearson's 2r -
               close to 1). Also convenient is the fact that tan. A ;.-. the maximum first derivative of
               the recovery limb. Hence:
                                                   H
                                                      - =
                                               -L@)v) A
               where E@ is the maximum first derivative of,the ascendin- limb, E-   is the same for the
8               recovery limb, and g is a constant.
                       There are several complications in the use of this expression for computino-

                     0
                                                         21
                so that a storage requirement e,%ists. The use of Ii/tan A (Figiir,.,,, 5@ @-;ould be more pre-
                cise and because h and tan A are taken simultaneously, would be easier to program,
                but it would require measurement of li in terms of its distance above the baseline or
    2            preferably above the asymptotic level. This becomes a problem in DC recording,
                because of expected baseline shifts, and such an approach does not lend itself readily
                to analog computation without cumbersome programming.
                       Secondly, because responses in close sequence interact, contingencies must
                appear in the program for selection  of  waves  meeting  standard  criteria.  These
                cr2iteria  are:
                        (a) 'Ihe time of onset of any measurable response must be at least 7
                             seconds after the onset of the previous response. This is neces-
                             sitated by the fact that -recovery rate of a small  wave  superimposed
                             upon the recovery of a preceding larger one is spuriously rapid. The
                             effect is shown in Figure 7a.
                        (b) R2esponses which do not last at least 4 seconds prior to  the  onset  of
                             a successive wave must not be accepted for measurement. This
                             requirement prevents  measurement  of  a  wave  whose  peak  negative-
                             going first derivative is cut short by the orset of another wave (Figure 7b).
                                                        Method
                         A corrlbination of analog computer 2and digital logic circuitry Is used to meet
                 the conversion, storage, and contingency gating requirements of the computation.

                                @i         o
                                           (/I
                      (D
                                (D         0(D
                                (A         0   4
                                           0
                      o
                      p         OQ
                                           (D
                      0
                                (D         (D
    2                            @j
                      0         0          <
                      10        '          (D
                      (D                                                                                                                       
LO
                                           E3
                      p
                                           0   Fi
                             2   0
                      o         r-
                                Cl)        (t)
                                           En
                                           (D
                                           cn  (n
                                               Id
                                           cn. 0
                                               En
                                               (D
  5                              0          It
                                           ct
                                           0
                                           0   0                                                                           07
                                ('D        H   rt

                                                      22
               .@n4l2E- olqi@zial Cor@ crl@@ n@_ SL2i -,C, and@Cop,@p,,,-,Ii@on
                     The skin conductance rcsponsc is recordcd Nvith a constant voltage bridge
               whose output, p-zoportional to skin conductance, is fed in*lo a Beckman Dynograpti
              2 amplifier. 'nie voltage at the I)cn output is fed into two cther channels, each using
               a 0. I-second couplin- time constant, thereby achieving e--.rivation of the trace.
               The output of one of these is used to fire a Schmitt trigger to start analysis at the
               onset of a response. The output of the other is sorted into positive-going and
               negative-going components by fhe use of diode c2lippers which feed their respective
               signals to storage capacitors. This storage is arranged as a peak memory circuit
               so that after a response is over, one of the nvo capacitors is charged up to the peak
               voltage of the positive first derivative, the otlier the negative. Upon a command
               signal from the associated logic circuitry, both capacitors are read simultaneously
               by two separate voltage-to-freq,ue2ncy converters. These feed into a preset counter
               programmed to divide one frequency by the other, thus accomplishino- the computation
               of E@/E- or its reciprocal. The quotient is fed into a dio,,ital printer and at the same
                                                                  is pr'--nted out on another
               time the value of the positive-goino- derivative (E                          printer
            2   to furnish amplitude data. Details of the arrangement are shown in FigiLres Sa and Sb.
               Control Loo,,ic System
                      This system must recogni7.e the onset of a response, must screea out responses
               which fail to meet the t@,vo time criteria, must time and command readout and print,
               and must reset the storage can,-icitors. It must also decide, on the bas--i's of a minimum
  4             amplitude crit erion, which responses are large enough -o measure. @-,iti@,out inc,-lrring
               unacceptable error because of low si.-iial-to-noise ratio. These demaads are,met by

                                        22a
                                                             -7 5
                                              PEN
                                            OUTPUT           7,5 k
                                   REED
              CONTROL
                                   RELAY
               LOGIC
                 REED
                                                       0-
             2    RELAY                        STORAGE
                   2
                                                       0-
                                               0 0 0                    2
                            STORAGE RESET
                              PRINT COvIMAiND
                                                                     PF'
                                                                       ESET
                                            4                        @COUINTER
                                               PRINTER
                                                                       A/B
         Figure 8a. Diagram of electronic programmino@ for automatic analysis of recovery
          rate.

                                     22b
                                                                        NEG
                                         POS
                                                                        OUT
                                         OUT
         PEN                            2-Z K
         RQFUT
                                   colm
                                 STORAG2E
                                  RESET
         Figure Sb. Storare circwt.

                                                       23
                   A free-running pulse generator (,c\) is set to fire at a rate of one per  second.,
              Its output is fed into a binary counter (Figure 9). The onset of a response  serves  to
              zero the counter sc tl-iat tin-ie gatin(, of subsequent operations may be standardized.
              This is accomplished by using the first dcri2vative signal from peii 2 of the dyno,,rraph.
              This signal is fed to a Schmitt trigger which fires @viienever a positive-going wave
              occurs in the first derivative trace.  Firing of the Schm'itt trigger not only resets the
              binary counter to sta.ct counting at the next second, but also fires a one-shot  having
              a 4. I-second output pulse.  The-ascendinc, lin-Lb of this pulse fires a2 second one-
              shot whose 0.5-second output is used to trip a reed relay to discharge the storage
              capacitors (reset). The primary purpose of the 4. 1-second one-shot, however,
              is to act as a gate to prevent processing of the response.if a second wave starts with-
              in 4. 1 se6onds after onset. This is accomplished  by  feeding  these  one-shot  pulses
              into a quadruple and-gate: the othe2r three inputs of which are fed from the 0-0- I
              terminals of the b4-nary counter. When 4 seconds of counting are up, the and-gate
              can fire only if the one-shot has not returned to its off-state. If this condition is
              met, the and-gate output acts as a command to the pre-set counter to take the quotient
              of the two storage outputs.  The preset counter, after finishin- the division, sionals
              the printer to prir-t. The quadruple and-r-te also fires a one-shot whi'ch advances a
              decade counter used to number the responses on  the  printout.  U  a  second  or  third
              response occurs during the initial 4-second period, the 4. I-second one-shot is reset
              and its off condition output serves as an inhibit signal to the and-gate.
                     The requirement for at least  7  seconds  benveen  processed  waves  is8  met  by
              the use of a triple and-gate and two flip-flops interposed bet@Nveen the Schmitt, tri@Ser
              and the 4. I-second one-shot.  The triple a,,id-gate is led by a I- I- 1 output frori Llie

                                                                                   AMIL
                      F r-o- -m
                       Pen                                   One                           Reed
                                                             Shot                          Relay
                                                             0. 5 Sec                         2
                     Sclunitt
                2     Trigger
                                                                 In        One.
                                                                           Shct
                                                                            4. 1  Sec
                                                               Reset
                                                                                              IrNbit
                        Reset
                     2      Pulse
                        Generator
                                                                                    Preset
                                                                                    Counter
                                                                                                        Decade
                                                                                                        Counter
                         1    0               1  4                                   Printer               BCD
                                                                                                        Decoder
             Fio.ure 9.  Control lo,,7ic c;,.rcuitr-y.

                                                       24
               biniry counter so that it fires at 7 seconds after the Schmitt tri,,,,-Icr lias signalled
               start of the response. Its output resets the two flip-flops and allows a subsequent
               firing of the Scli-nitt trigger to fire the 4. I-second one-sliot. Until this triple and-
               gate fires again seven seco2nds later, any pulse coi-nin(- through after the 4 seconds
               of processing cannot fire the one-shot and therefore canhot initiate -tnodier computing
               sequence  The -LNvo flip-flops are connected in such a way that the 4. 1-second one-
               shot cannot be fired again until the triple and-gate fires again. Thus no computation
               can be started u--iless t2he binary counter has been allowed to count for seven seconds
               after the start of the last response. Any response occurring during these seven seconds
               starts the count over again..
                                                    Results
                      This system proved to be very accurate, the prir-t-out data ag-reeing very
               closely with values obtained by hand measurement of the positive and negative peaks
               o2f the first deriiative trace.  Values of Eland of the time constants obtained by the
               t%vo methods for each of twenty solitary responses of a Nvriteout are plotted against
               each other in Figure 10. From this standpoint the system is very reliable. The
               major source of error is caused by responses in which the ascending limb is in fact
               a slurring of tnvo responses into a single one without an intermediate p7eak. In such a
               case the Schmitt trigger fails to recognize the second response because the derivative
               has not recrossed baseline (Figure 11). The maximum slope is that of one of the two
               slurred components rather than beina additive and is not consistent with total H. The
               value computed electronically is, therefore, considerably less than that computed
                     II--  T-

                                                                                                                                               
Cd
                                                                                                                                               
4-)
                                         2                                                                                                     
(n
                                                                                                                                               
4-4   i
                                                                                            2                                                  
0
                                                                                                                                               
Cd
                                                                                                               LLI
             2                                                                                                                   Cd
                                                                                                                                Cd
                                                                                                                                               
2                         Cd
                                                                                                                                               
Cd
                                                              OTUO.110;Dl a                                                                    
2                                                                                                                      'O
                                                                                                                                               
r4
                                                                                          6                                                    
@T4

                                                                                AMNL
                                                        24b
                Figure 11. BreakdoNvn of linear relation bet@veen primary amplitude and first
                derivalk-ive amplitude in duplex response F. Simple responses D and E show linear
                 relation.

                                                     25
                    The above clcficicncy may explaiii the relatively 10%@,rcorrelation of ti.-le
             constants derived electronically from those obtaiiicd by the various manual methods.
             The (-6.rrelations with od-ior measures for the same population of 65 responses
             analyzed elsewhere in this paper w2ere as follonvs:
                           Electronic vs. Log' F,               0.59
                           Electronic vs. H/tan A               0.68
                           Electronic vs. Template              0.42
                    Another problem with the  electronic method lies in the selection of the minimum.
             threshold for trigc,,,erino, the Schmitt trigger.  If this is chosen too low, many clean high
             ampl2itude waves are lost because of the occurrence of a miniscule wave in the previous
             7 seconds. If set too high many perfectly useable waves are lost. The compromise
             between these t@vo conditions is difficult. With the particu[ar threshold used in this
             test (16c7 of half scale), the system accepted 63 of 86 responses which met amplitude
                    /0
             criteria, the remainder being rejected because of temporal conting2encies. The total
             aumber of responses, however, was far greater than the 65 having adequate amplitude.
             For a threshold 8"7 of half scale (i.e., 407 of full channel width), the total number of
                              .,O                    /0
             responses reachir..g amplitude criterion would have been 188.
                    While this automatic system meets minimum requirements for an operationally
    9         satisfactory system, its susceptibility to spurious readings of relative wave amplitude
             when multiple responses fuse in the ascending limb is a rither serious disadvantage.
             It appears possible to construct an on-line analog system lsi.'Io, one of the other
             approaches and in this regard the measurem--,-it of the slop-- of ulic log-compressed

                                                    26
          D) Sun-ini@in, oi' Coni-)arison,5 Bct,,@,cen ',\Tcisures
                  For convenience a summary of  the  various  intercorrelatiol,,s  examined  is  shown
          in the matrix in Tablz- 1.
          Table 1. Correlations bet-,veen time constants  measured  in  different  ways  2on  the  same
                    63 responses.
                                  Template        Electronic         Log /E         H/tan A          D
          t/2                        .94
          Template                                   .42               .86            .81            .82
          Electronic                                                   .59            .68            .63
          Log.*E                                        2                              .87            .86
          H/tan A                                                                                    .90
                  The overall t igh correlation bet@veen the various manual measures gives conf idencc@
          that a fundamental form characteristic of th  e recovery limb :-s in fact  under  examination.

<<OCR Error  --  Unable to read TIFF image>>
                                                          28
             various couplin-s into a Beck-iiia,-i Dynograpli equipped with rectilinear ink
                                                                                            writers.
             Time constants of 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, S, 10 seconds and DC were used. Time constants
             were measured by the amplitude-slope method described elsewher2e.  Forty responses
              were selected wizh tlic,@ qualification that they must start at least seven seconds  after
              the start of the previous wave, must have an amplitude at  least  5  mm  (full  scale  was
             .40 mm) and must not be interrupted by a successive wave until at least 50@o recovery
              was completed.  In each case the rate constant was calculated from tan A/H.  Values
              for each coupling condition w2ere matched with those from the DC record       to    compute
              a Pearson  s   pro@Llct-moment    correlation.
                                                        Results
                        The correlations found at each value of coupling  time  constant  are  shown  in
               Table   2.
               Table   2. Correlation betnveen recovery rates (tan A/H) computed      from IDC records
                          and t.-iose from- ca2pacitance-coupled  records  taken  with  various  coupling
                          time constants.
                     R-C                                                                        Slope Of
               Time Constant                          Pearson's r                                Line Of
                  (Coupling)                                                                   Regression
                        ISeconds                           .33                    2                  .32
                        2                                  .51                                      .44
                        3                                  .72                                      .27
                        4                                  .80                                      .59
                        6                                  .86
                                                                               7                     .43
                        8                                  .90                                      .68
                       10                                  .86                                      .86

               Note that Iiigii correlations are found for 6, 8, and 10 second couplin-
                                                                                        constants,
               Lliat is wlien the coul)ling time constant approaches the time constant of the ,;Io%vest
               waves in the population (see Sections 6 and 8).  The correlation reaches a relative2ly
               conslant level at coupling coil'St'ants of 6 seconds or longer. This constant lcv-!  is
               less than 1, and is in part indicative of the departure of the relation from  linearity
               and in part of tile repeat measurement reliabUiLy.  By comparison the repeat measure-
               ment reliability for the template measure found in the earlier study was 0.93 (co2efficient
               of concordance).
                      The DC values of the recovery Iii-nbs are plotted against  tile  rate  constants  found
               with each coupling constant in Fiaure 12.,  As  expected,  rate  constants  are  increased  as
               compared %vith th@-, DC value, with greatest acceleration fcund when shortest coupling
               constants were used.  '\Ioreo,.,er, at any given coupling2 constant, those recovery limbs
               having the sho:etest rate constants Gongest tifne constants) are affected the most.  Be-
               cause of this, the relationship benveen DC rate constants and those found with capacitance
               coupling is non-linear. Short coupling constants  not  only  cause  a  greater  scattering  of
               points, making the measure less sensitive, but also affect the slope of the relation as
               seen in Table 2.
                       Since, as discussed elsewhere, the rate constant of  the  first  derivative  is
               the same as that  of  the  primary  wave,  one  may  wonder  why  intermediate  coupling  con-
               stants, e.g., I second, do not give as good a relation.  The answer lies in the fact
               tl-,at the time constant for obtaining the first derivative must be so short that all
               responses,  long and short, are affected similarly.  Witi t3he

                                                   29a
              RC    I Sec
                       0                                                             C A @D
                RC    3 Sec
                                                                  0
                                                00              0
                                                             0
                            0    0                     0
                                           0
                                        0
                                 0
                                                                                        c     p
                              0    0 0
              Figure 12. Relation of rate constants of direct coupled responses to rate constants
               r,omputed on same waves recorded with capacitance couplinc,,.

                                                        2 9b
                      RC    4 Sec
                                                                                            CAt
                       RC     6 Sec

                                                      29c
                                    RC    8 Sec
                                                                                  CA?
                                      RC    10 Sec

                                                        30
             Lntcrmcdia te coupling constants used licre, tile slower waves N,;ill be differ  ciitially
             affected and the relationship breaks do,.Nrn.
                     These results imply that  the  use  of  a  capacitance-coupled  system  having  a
             time constant of 6 seconds or longer is  suitable  for  the  de-.erminati0on  of  recovery
             time constants. Though values obtain     ed from such recordings are not directly
             comparable with tjlosc from DC  recordi-rigs,  they  have  similar  capacity  to  reflect
              changes incidental to shifts in behavioral state.

                                                        31
             6.      TFIE- IiNFOr,.,%[.,\TIO,\' COiN-A@-EiNT OF TIIE- l@E-CO%'Ei\Y
                     ELr-'CTRODEr\,\IAL rE-SI"ONlr'>E
                                                         t@sliowed that during an clectrodcrmal res
                     A previous 2study
             poiise (E-DR) there is frequently a sudden decrease in tllb hydration of the covered
             skin surface, and that this plicnoi-nonoii occurs mucli more often during co.-iiitive
             activity such as listeiiing to instructions than N@,itli startle responses. These liydra-
             tion responses, Nvhicli are attributed to absorption of water from 2the surface, commence
             at about one secord after the onset of the skin resistance response (SRR) and reach
             peak in about three to four seconds.  Their occurrence is not determined by the ampli-
             t-ude of the SRR but is associated Nvith the presence of positive waves in the skin po-,
             tential response (SPR).  @Vhere pure ne(rl-)tive SPRs occur, hydratioli under the electrode
             e2ither increases (Figure 13) or remains  unchancred.  These  obsery@ations  sur,  est  that
                                                                                            .9
             two different kinds of EDRs might be occurring,    a supposition consistent with con-
             clusions drawn in an earlier study                                 Moreover,   since   skin
             conductance is in part determined by the level of2 fluid in the sweat ducts and by the
             hydration of the corneumi
                                                                                   an  absor-otion  res-
             ponse micht be expected to speed return of resistance or conductance to base level
             and thereby steepen the recovery limb.  An indication of t@is is seen in Figure 13,
             where recovery rate of SCRs in the second panel averages twice that of the first2.
                    The absorp-tion response appeared to-hold promise as a useful qu    alitative  index
             O.' behavioral set, bull- there are serious d4.j'ficult,.es in its dire--t quantitative measure-
             mer,it due to the conplicating effects of simultaneous sweat secre@Lion.  It was hoped
             that the recovery limb of the SRR or SCR micht carry tl-,e iTLformLi4lion reflected i-,l
             the absor@,",'c@n rcs:Do.,isc ard at *the same time be more ame-iabl-- to qua,-,@icati%,o measure-

<<OCR Error  --  Unable to read TIFF image>>
                                                      32
          mciit.  This scctioii is concci--licd @%,itli tl-c          of c,,ua,itit;-,tivc methods for
          examining the rcco%,cry rate of the L,;DR ird witit an o.,-aniina@ion of its relation to
          other measures and its sc,isitivity to 2behavioral state.
                                                    Method
           t@,,.iluatioii of the Rccg@v r@R,,te
                                                  had developed a measure called the Recovery
           Quotient for describinc, the rate of return of skin resistance to base line after re:s-
                                   0
           ponse to stimulation.  They did this by 2determining the percent recovery reached in
           five minutes after peak displacement.  Their measure ordirarily was applied to a
           complex toncr-lasdrcr response and they interpreted it as an i    ndication  of  the  capacity
           of the central nervous system to reestablish homeostasis follo%ving a disturbance. The
            Recovery Quotient did not deal Nvith wave form and theoretically should be unrelated to
            2the measure of concern in this paper.  For the present purposes, the recovery limb was,
            as a first appro%imation, assumed to be exponential, a conclusion also reac!aed by
                              One fundamental characteristic of such a curve, its rate constant,
            or i.,i reciprocal terms its time constant, is inde-endent of amplitude and was selected
            as a best first appro-.i,mation of recovery rate. It is viewed  as  a  2useful  reflection  of
            this rate, but not as indicatina, a truly exponential form for the recovery limb.  Exami-
             nation of the exporential  equation  reveals  numerous  methods  for  evaluating  this  con-
             sta.nt, but t-,-io convenient ones were adopted for use in tl-ds study.  For either one,
             I)C recordings are mandatory.
                     Half-time measure.  To determ. inc,@ the tiric constart (tc), one should measure
             the time reaji red to attain 631 recovery (i.e. , 1 - lllc), b,"t     rcco%,e.-N  haLf-ti@-,Ie

                                                            33
                                      1 - 43 t/2) and is more cas ily measured. It can  be  cluickly  dctcr-
                 relation to cc (tc
                 mined by ttic use of a transparent overlay containing  a  series  of  parallel  horizontal
                 lines bisccted by a single vertical line.  The central parallel line is made longer
                 tha2n all the rest and contains a metric scale on the rig'it side of the  vertical,  with
                 zero at the intersection. The vertical line is made to pass  throu-h  the  peak  of  the
                 wave perpendicular to the base line. The  template  is  moved  up  and  down  until  the
                 central line is midnvay bet@veen onset and peak of.the wave, as  indicated  by  the  short
                 parallel lines. The 2distance from the ver-Lical line to t[ic intersection of  the  central
                 horizontal line with the recovery slope is read from the  scale  and  converted  to  half-
                 time by the appropriate Qalibration.  This method ca-a only be usea on responses Nvmch
                 recover at lear-t 50/10 before a second response occurs,
                        Curve-matching.  A  second  method  is  based  on 2 curve-matcEn,-.   As   seen   in
                 Figure 14a, if zhe members, of a class of  responses  of  differing  amplitudes  all  have
                 the same recovery time constant, it is possible to superimpose them on a single
                 exponential curve.  One may use a transparent overlay bearing a family of exponential
                 curves of k-no@va time constant (obtained, for example,  by  recordin,-s  of  a  condensor2
                 dischar e through various resistances).  Thb tc for any resp@)nse mav be quict-,Iy deter-
                        9
                 mined by placirg the overlay such that its base line (asymptote) Is horizontal and passes
                 through the point of onsell- @@)f the response.  A straightedge is then held against the loi@-er
                 margin of the overlay, which should be parallel to the b0ase line,  and  the  overlay  is
                 moved horizo-,itally until one of the standard curves coincides %vith  the  recovery  limb
                 or a best i@-iterpolatio:i is made (Figure I'llb).
                        '@@",ch of the
                                    a@-,ove methods has its advantages and disadvanta(@,es.  Tle half-time

                               -a,uno I-epuauodxa u-e uodn p,?soduluadns Z)I-C.1 laDA00al @ures
         inq sopmt                                                        @o     C[
                  .IdLur 3uaiapTp jo sasuodsax Iruliopoiloala aailla ;o lui,-A-c-i        a-i

                                                       33b
                 Figure I'zb.  Illustrat-ion of curve-matching to deterrni-ne the "time constatit" of
                 the steenest por-don of the recovery Umb.

                                                        34
                                                                                    bc evali,,aLed. The
             not recover by 50@" prior to oiisct of a subscqtient %@.,avc aiill cai,,,,iot
             curvc-matcl,ilig MCLI10d is SOIIICW',Iat MORC (liffiCUlt; it soon becomes clear t2hat many
             N%,aves depart from the cxtoiiciitial sliapc and niatcliiii- is -anibi,(,,-tious.  HoNicvc r,  by
              using the early portion of recovery just arter the steepest slope has been reached,
              satisfactory matcliiii- can be made for practically any  response,  Since  tl-ds  can  be
    2          done on a portion wliicli reaches only Z5 to ')01/'o of rccovc::y, many more waves lend
              themselves to tWs  measure  than  t.)  the  half-time  measure.  As  might  be  expected,
              curvilinear recordinm  produces  a  distortion  in  the  recovery  limb  which  becomes  appre-
              ciable if the writeout extends beyond the middle tl-iird  of  the 2 scale.  The  half-time
              measure is therefore recommended for curvilinear recordings since it is possible to
              make objective corrections for this effect, for example, using an overlay Nvith an appro-
               priately curved -vertical line.  Corrections for the curvili near  effect  in   curve-matching
               is considerably more difficult and more approximate, and it is recommended that the
               use o2f this method be restricted to rectilinear recordinas or to the middle third of
               the curvilinear scale.
               Procedure
                        Subjects were 106 normal adults of both sexes, ao-es 17 to 45. The number used
                in each experiment varied and is indicated in the presentation of results.  Each e%-peri-
                ment was run on  a  different  population.  Electrodes  were  silver-silver  chloride  pl2ates
                applied to masied sites, 1/4-inch diameter, Nvith a thickenina agent in 0. INl 'L\aCl as
                an electrode  paste.  A  constant  current  brid-e  (current  density  8  niicroamp/cm2)  was
                used to obtain SRRs and a constant volta-e bridge (0.7':-@ V across t-,vo active  sites)  for
                 SCR'                     All exosomatic electroderrr,-6@l placcmen@,s @@.,erc on the volar

          hand.  For polcn';al              the reforence clo-trocie %vas over the ulziar bone,
          onc-fiftli t!ic distance from cll)ow to %,irist,  Fl@,clr,-Lioii was nicasured N@,,itli the contact
          device described clsc%@,licrc                  the placement bcin- on the volar sur-
                         2                                                   C-1
          face of tllc fin-crtip.  Rccor(lin(-, of the above variabl es was accomplished using a
          dircetly-coupled Boc'%-man Type R Dynograph. In on(-- series of runs, a reflectance
          plethysmo-r,ipli unit was applied to the tlicnar eminence of the non-preferrcd hand
          and finger pulse volt.,2me was recorded using capacitance-cou-.)Ied amplification
                 The subject was- seated in a small room and after a 15-minute st,--biLization
          period was exposed to stimuli which differed for each experiment as described below.
                  ExiDeriment 1. This was a replica of an experiment by
                       ',--,,ihich was run for another purpose. In this the subject is given a 3-mi2nute
          rest period  followed by a 1-minute task in which he is frustrated by the experimenter
          in his attempts to count back--@vards.  He then participates with the experimenter in a
           guessin- game in w-dch the experimenter attempts to guess the number which the sub-
           ject selects. If he fails, the subject presses a button which supposedly shocks the
           experimenter.  Follo%vin2- this t@vo-minu,Le "agoressive" game, he is criven a second
           rest -period.
                   Ex-oerimeTit 2. A mixed series oi'L eight tones and eicht light flashes of moderate
           intensity is presented to the subject who has been instructed to relax @vith his eyes open.
            Follo%,,-ino- this he is instructed as follows: "This time, when you hear a tone it will be
            a warnina- signal fcr a second one which will occur at any time up to a half-minute
                    C)
            later. At the sound of the second tone you are to press tl-ds footswitch as -apidly as
            poss-@ble so l@;c can measure your reaction time.  In the same way a lirht flasli    be

                         to C..-.pcct I sccoiicl lil-IIL fllsh at tinle @-ou arc to 10',.C tilc FOSitiO.-I Of
               the nio%,in- pointer.  A ti-dr(i ilasli %,;ill occur sliorlty after tliit, at which time you arc
                        0
               to repor-t the letter izidiciti2n- its position. " The inter-stiniulus interval for each task
               ranged froi-n 10 to '00 seconds. The pointer rotated at 60 r.p.m. This series @vas
               continued undl eight trials of each task- had been run in randomized order.
                      Ex2criment 3.  The subject was told to rclax Nvitli his eyes open and .was ex-
               posed to a series of five tones (approximately 75 db at the subject, I second duration)
               presented throu(,,Ii a speaker at a varying intcr-trial interval (10 to 25 seconds). As
               soon as tl,,is habituation series ended, he was instructed for the next sequence which
               followed immediately. In this series, tones of the sai-ne intensity and ranoe of inter-
             2  trial intervals as for the-first series co-,istituted signals for a reaction time efforl
               (fin-er-press) -without a foreperiod.
                      ExiDe-Liment 4. The subject is criven two reactior- dme t-,4Lals with a foreperiod
               of 4 to 10 seconds.  Both warrliii r and execution signals are 0. 5-second tones delivered
               f2rom a  speaker (approximately 65 db at. the subject). Tliiese trials were intermixed in
               ra-,idom order with t@@vo word association trials to form a block in which the inter-trial
               interval varied between 20 and 60 seconds. Blocks were repeated Nvith t,.vo-minute
               interveril:-,io- res,6- periods.
                       Ext)eriment 5.  In tMs series, run ea2rlier for another purpose
               the sub ect wore a contact hydration detector as well as skin resistance and potential
               electrodes. Stimuli were a mixed series of sounds and lichts of moderate intensity
               i.-iterrupted at intervals Nvith a period of conversation.

                                                   37
                                        Results and Discussion
            Characteristics of the Rccovcrv \Icastire
                  ReliaLl!!Iy. Inter-scorer reliability of the more subjective of the t@vo  methods
            of measuring recovery rate, namely curve-matcllin-, was  dt-,termined  by  having  each
            of three ind2ividuals score the same 30 isolated rcsponses chosen at random by a
            lottery method from a population of 100 useable responses. Time constants ranae,_l
            from 2.2 to 7.2 seconds. The Ke-,idall coefficient of concordance  among  their  scores
            was 0. 93.  The time consumed in making a single measurement was appro,-,Imately
            seven seconds. Despite the high inter-scorer reliability in2dicated in the measurement
            of Isolated responses, i.e. , responses whichoccurred at least five seconds  after  the
            peak of the Iast previous response, there is an apparent source of error in the measure-
            ment of recovery rates of responses which themselves fall on the steep portion  of  the
            recovery limb of a previous larger wave.  For this reason, scoring of responses is
            best accomplished on waves which otcur at least  2ten seconds after the peak, of the
            preceding wave.
                   Relation between tc and t/2. The reliability of  the  balf-time  measure  should
            be even greater than that of the curve-rnatcl-dng measure, in view of-the -rigorous method
            by which it is obtained. It does, however, frequently demand the reading of very short
            time Intervals with precision, a chore which can be difficult when for  conven2ience  in
            making other measurements, slonv paper speeds are used, -e.g., 1 mm- per second.
            To see how the two measures compared, 22 consecutive responses'recorded with
            rectilinear pens were analyzed by t@vo persons, each using one of the t@%ro methods.
            Time constants ran-ed from 1.6 to 8.7 seconds. The mean values -Lor tc and t/2 res-
            nectivelv we re 5. 40 and 35. 83 sccorlds. The ratio of these values, 1. ' )9, a,-r--es rather

                                                    33
            i@-ell Nl,,itli the theoretical ratio of 1.43. The product-monient correlation be,@,,,Ccn tc
            and t/2, 0.94, can be regarded as a combined test both of the accuracy of measure-
            ment and of the validity of the exponential treatment. 'fli-is result, together with the
      2      1.39 ratio, implies that either measure is acceptable, dnd that the portion of the curve
            used does not deviate appreciably from an exponential form.
                   Resistance vs. conductance responses. In some instances responses were
            measured concurrently from nvo sites, one Nvith a constar..t'Voltage bridge, the other
            with constant current. Recovery half-times %vere det@,-n-ni2ned for corresponding SCRs
            a.nd SRRs and found to be highly correlated, though different in absolute magnitude.
            Correlations between 20 pairs of responses on each of three subjects were .33, .82
            and .95. Mean values for measurements on SCR and SRR respectively were: subject
            A, 4.9/6.3; subject B, 3.6/7.3; subject C, 3.6/3.8. Thus although either SCR or
     2       SRR may be used for studying chan-es in recovery rate, if individuals are to be com-
            pared it would be desirable to Standardize on one of the nvo systems. Differences be-
            tween the mean SCR and SRR values, however, may well --eflect differences between
            sites rather than between methods of recordin-, since despite high correlations,
            appreciable differences are found between measures tak-e2r. from simultanous palxnar
            and dorsal SRRs as seen in the example in Figure 18.
                    Relation of rEERI@@@@ to amulitude. The assumption of an exponential form
            for the recovery limb implies that the rate constant should be independent of amplitude.
            This assumption was tested by an examination of the relal,-,io-.i of recovery rates to
            ainplitude using the half-time measure on 20 SCRs from each of six subjects. The
            -product-morrient corre lations were .21, -.20, .28, 62, @7 4 and .19. These results

                 AWL
                                                    ^9
                                                    0
          t,,@,o may for sorne sLI)jccts be related tilrou,,Ii a co,,iinioii irLRticlicc. Tile Positive
          sigi,is for the- t-,vo si-idficant correlat-ioiis (.62 and .71112) @voulct inciicatc ti,at there is
                                   cct s for responses of 1-dgllcr amplitudes to I)c
          a tendency in some stibi                                                associated with
          slower recovery rates.
                  Relation to Positive SPR - From the relations described in the introductory
           secti2on, it was predicted that positive SPRs shoulcl be associated with fast recovery
           rates.  Out of "30 subjects run in Experiment 2, 13 showed both clear positive SPRs
            biphasic) and "Pur3" ne-ative SPRS.    These were used for -he comparison, Since
           the magnitude of positive-@oing activity associated with a negative SPR cannot at
           present be quantitatively evaluated                    2              a test of associadon
            rather than correlation was made.    In each case two clearly utiiphasic nefative res-
            ponses and two bi@hasic rosponses N@,-ith a pronou-,iced posit:ve deflection were selected
            from the skin potential record. The ti-ne constants of the corre@pondinc, sMn resis-
            tanc& responses were measured and for 12 of the 13 subjects the ave2rage time constatit
            associated with positive SPRs was shorter than that associated v.-Ith "pure" negative
             SPRS.  Tne respe--tive group means were 3.7 and 7.4 seconds @p < .005). Amplit-@.,des
             in the t@vo categories were not si-gmfic-,,ntly different, although responses accompanying
             positive S?.Rs tenied to be somevihat2 larger, the mean log ratio being 0. 126, equivalent
             to an amplitude ratio of 1. 34: 1. If anything this would reduce the differences bet%,,,e'en
              time constants rather than account for them.
                     The relation of recovery rate to occurrence of absorption responses was also
              exa,-nined l'or an associative relationship rather than a correlazion be--ause absor-@-,"ion,
              Li'lle the        SPR, is Oifficult to measure quan@,italivelv                   Data
                                                                                       e@n -'Hp lik@cl-@--itiorl

                                                       10
                                                      -3
                   slio%@.,ing mar@-c(J z)j)sorptio,,i and t-\,.-O siio\,.,iii- an i-,lcreasc in li,'d,-atoti were
              selected in a randz)niizccj niaiiiier, @,.,itliotit regar2d to stiniu(its. The time constatits
              of the recovery limbs of the corresponding SRRs %vere measured and an lntor-ilidi@vidual
              comparison made between the two categories. In 12 of,tlio 13 subjects examined, recovery
              was faster in association with absorptioii (p < .001). The group means were2 6.0 and 9.1,
              The association of faster iccovcl-y rate with the occurreiic'c of absorption responses
              a.nd with positive SPRs is consistent with the third combination of these variables,
              narnely that between occurrence of absorption and of posit-.vc SPRs previously reported
              Sensitivitv to 13chavioral'State
                     Both me-,2sures, t/2 and te, proved highly sensitive to change in behavioral set.
              In some cases, for example in the comparison of a rest period @%,ith a task period, the
              conventional ampit-ude or frequency measures would discriminate just as well, but the
              sr.-en-gth of the recovery rate in differentiating between ccriditions did not de'Dend upon
              an. plitude. 'ivforeover, in many cases, it distin-,ruished between conditions when a-Tiipli-
              tude per se could not. In this initial examination of the resolving strength of this
              measure, t/2 has been sampled in some experiments, tc in others.  Each clearly
              demor.strated its value, and the choice of which to use is lar-ely a matter of preference.
              The results of the variou2s experiments are presented belo%v.
                     ExDcrirrient 1: Rest vs.-ai@,,gressive game.  In examining differences between
              the recovery limb lialf-times of spontaneous waves in the rest period and those durincr
              the a,(-,rcrressive g-@me, an effort was made to minir.-iize anv intrusion of an amplit-ude
              effect.  The fi9rs.' three rosponscs of at leas*6 5 mm an, p',-itude   met the liall-tim, e

                    0
              subjects thcsc were taken from the pro-task- resc pcriw, for the other half from the
              Post-tasL, period.  'flic first tlirce responscs from the game period wliich fell in the
              same amplitude range as those of the rest period were used for comparison.  Figure
              15 sh2ows representative strips taken from each of these periods. The pre-task and
              post-task relaxa'ion periods (upper and lower panels) both show responses which re-
              cover more gradually than those during the task period. As for the other subjects,
              t/2 in the pre- and post-task periods are rather similar. It is significant that the
              sharpening of the recovery limb started dur2ing the instruction period. A portion of
              the instruction period is shonvn in the section of the middle strip to the left of the
              arrow designating start of the task. The group mean t/2 for the rest period was 5.6
              seconds and for the task-'period 3.3 seconds (p < .001). All of the 12 subjects showed
              a reduction durino- the aggressive game, the mean decrease being 411/70 (Tables 3 and 4).
          2    The amplitudes of the t@vo groups of response samples were well  matched  and  the  small
              mean difference of 1270 Nvith the task, responses being larger fell far short of significance
              (t   87).
                     Experiment 2: Sim2le stimuli vs. _@!zna.1s. The half-time measure was also
              used in this comparison made on 16 other subjects. Here the responses  to  light  fla2shes
              during the relaxation period before instructions were con--pared with responses to the
              warning lights (not the execution signal) for the perceptual task. The last three useable
              responses during the.rest period were compared with the first three useable responses
              during the task period. An acceleration of recovery rate occurred 4tv 13 of the 16 sub-
              jects (Table 4) when the light flash took on signal prop4erties. The average decrease
              in t/2 was 291 (p < .05). The amplitudes of the response samples avera-ed 9-' less
                          ,,O                                                               /0
              durirg t@e task period (t = 1. 14, NS).

                                                  41a
                                                                  CAL
                                          REST                     10,u
                                         TASI(
                      s PTtTASr%
                                               F,' S T
                                  T/2
          Figure 15.  Recordinrrs of skin f-o-cL%,,',uct-,,-nce during pre-task rest (upper),
                                a
          instr,,jctions and task (middle) and post-task (lower), showing acceleration
          of recovery rate durinor instructions and task-. Illustration o-F half-time
          measure is shown in lower trace. Time line is 10 seconds.

                     ANIL
                                                            '2
                                                           -i
              Table 3,  Comparison of a,,-crage values of reco%,cry lialf-tir,-ic (t/2) for resting state
                          and gucssin- game task- in 12 subjects.
                                                   t/2 (seconds)2
              Subject                  Resting                           Tas<                   % qhange
                   I                   6.7                               5.6                         -i6
                   2                   5.0                               3.6                         -28
                   3                   4.9,                              3.i                         -33
                   4                 2  5.7                               3.1                         -46
                   5                   5.3                               2.9                         -45
                   6                   7.5                               2.8                         -63
                   7                   3.6                               3.1                         -14
                   8                    10.0                            2 5.0                         -50
                   9                   3.9                               3.2                         -22
                   10                  3@9                               2.9                         -26
                   11                  2.2                               1.7                         -23
                   12                  8.1                               3.i                2         -63
              Table 4.  Summary of results from three experiments shdwino, change in recovery
                                                                                   0
                          rate Nvith change in stimulus condition,  S@-mbol "n" designates number of
                          subjects who showed a decrease,
                                                                                           Mean
                      2       Measure                                                      Change
              N        11       Used           Condition A          Conditior- B           A to B        P-
               12      12       t/2          Rest                Aggressive Game           -2.3         <.001
                                             5.6 sec             3.3   sec                 (-4170)
               16      13       t/2        8  Liiht Flashes       Perceptual Task           -2.3         <.05
                                             7.  sec             5.6   sec                  - 2 9
               35      32       t.c.         Tones               Reaction Time              5.5         <.001
                                             10. 4 sec           4.9   sec

                                                     43
                    Ex-octinient 3: Simole tones v@, reaction time cffo.-rt. The cur,,c-matcldng
            method was used to dctcmliiie tc on the 35 subjects used in this experiment. The
            largest response to the five tomes presented durin,-, the habituation series  was  Com-
            pa2red ,vitli the response which was nearest in amplitude during the five reaction time
            trials. Of the 35 subjects, 32 showed acceleration of the@ rec overy limb durin-Y the
             reaction time series, as seen in the representative example if Figure 16. The mean
             decrease in recovery limb tc for the group was 53 percent (p  <  .001).  Tne  mean  tc
             presentation of non-signal tones was 10. 42 seconds for this po@ulaticii (Table 4).  In
             Experiment 2, the mean haif time for responses to non- signal li-ht  flashes  was  7.9
             seconds. Convertincr this to tc by multiplying by 1. 43 gives 10. 3 seconds, in remarl,-ablc--
             ag-reement %%,ith the results of Experiment 3, This similarity though perhaps fortuitous
             provides an added degree of confidence in 2the measure.
             Change in Arousal
                     So far this section has been concerned with the power of the recovery rate in
              discriminating bet-%veen responses in t@@o qualitatively different stimulus situations. It
              can a parently also distinguish benveen t-,vo similar stimulus periods in which the state
                   p
              of the su7oject is different. Representative examples may he2lp illustrate this  point
              without statistical treatment.  Figure 17 shows strips from two consecutive blocks in
              Experiment 4. In trace A, the subject is exposed to his first block of reaction time
               and word association stimuli. In trace B taken from a later block, the  subject  has
               apparently habituated to the situation, as indicated by reduction in response arnputude
               and by the fact --hat2 he has ceased respondina to the alertina- signal for the reaction
                                                           0               0
               time trials. The slowincr of the recovery limb @@rith reneated trials is espe--ialiv marked

                                                                           R T
              Figure 16. Representative skin conductance recordings from Experiment 3
              sho%ving acceleration of recovery rate during reaction time trials. Time line
              is 10 seconds.

                              RT          W- A                             RT
                                    RT                    VJA                   RT
                   Figure 17. Recordinas of skin resistance from blocls I (upper) and 2 (lower)
                   of Experiment 4 showing slonvincr of recovery rate with adaptation. Stimuli are
                                                  0
                   reaction rime trials (PT) an7d word association trials (WA). 'Vertical caubratio,,i
                   line is 25 K; time line, 10 seconds.  '@Resistance of unper trace is 200 K, lo%@ier
                   trace 190 K.

                                                  ,14
        tendency, only 7 of tli,2sc sl,,owcd an increase of o%,,cr ')O,;'O-
                                                stiiguisli bct@,.,ccn respo,-,scs to dissimilar stimuli
                'Me recovery Limb may also di
        in the sm-ne task pericd. An example is shown in Figure 18, taken2 from E,%periment
                                                from the dorsal and paimar surfaces of the fin-ers
        2. It shows simultaneous recordings                                                     0
         of nvo individuals.  'Me letter A indicates an alertin- signbLI for a forthcoming  reaction
         time trial and E, the execution signal. S denotes  a  spontanco-as  wave  occurrin-  during
         the f2oreperiod. The number below each respclnse is the value of its time constant.
         For the first subject, the spontaneous response has a-bout the same time constant as
         does l@ie alerting r4@sponse, but the execution response is considerably faster. The
          dorsal and palrnar surfaces reflect this same pattern despite absolute.differences in
          their recovery rates.  For the second subject, tl-ie constant for the spontaneous res-
  2        ponse is over twice as Iona,, as that for alerting; the constant for the execution response
          is also longer.  The difference between recovery rates of responses to alerting and
           execution responses is in general not a reliable one, but six of the 19 subjects did show
           an appreciable difference bemeeti the nvo. Two Nvere si --nificant at the . 005 level  of
                                                     2                 IT
           corlffdence, three at the .025 level and one at the .03 level. In five of these six cases,
           the shorter tc occurred Nvith the ececution signal.
            Individual Differences
                    Tae sensit!N-ity of the recovery rate to differences in stimulus condition and in
             state of the subject sLLgaested that inter-individual differences in recovery rate, seen
             for example in Tabl5e 3, might be associated with differences in characteristic behavior
             pati,erii. 'Me behavioral index chosen to test this idea, namely rate of habituation to
             tones or to reaction time trials, was derived from Experi ment 3. The qi,,otient of t-he
                                  40

                Adlilk
                                               4-lia
                   A               S
                                                                               7.2 5,p
                                                                3)
                    49              5.0 2.8
                                                                                       4.1
         2                                                                      5.7
                     3@              3P
            Figure 13.  Simultaneous recordin(Ts of skin resistance from dorsal surface of
                                              0                     ub;ects.  Stimuli are
            the finoer (ijpper) and palmar surface (lower) from t"vO s
            ale-,ting tone (A) and executio2n tone (E) for a reaction dme trial.  S denotes a
            spontaneous response. Numbers denote recoverv limb tim-a constants in seconds.
           'Tirrie line is 10 seconds.

                                                                link,
                                           45
         of habiwation rate, hi(,Ilcr values indicating faster habituation. Time constant measures
                           0
         were talen only from tlic.rcaction tinic series and for ')5 of the subjects were the same
         as obtained for the earlier analysis of this experiment2. In 18 other subjects who showed
         no responses to the tones, the response of median amplitudc was used. The group
         correlations bet-,keort this time constant and the various measures of habituation are
         shown in Table 5. Comparison of tc N@,itli rate of habituation of the reaction time res-
         Table S. Summary of results from Experiment 3 sho%ving product-moment correlation
                 bet@2veen recovery rate and habituation rate.
                               Habituation
         N                      Measure                     r                  P-
         53                    SCR durino,                 .33                <. 05
                                        0
                               Reaction Time
         32                    SCR during                  .13                NIS
                               Tones
         51      2              FPV Change                  .30                <. 05
                               durin- Tones
         ponses (r .33, N   53, p <05), shows that individuals @@,ith fast recovery rates tend
         to habituate more si-owly during the reaction time series.
               Of these 53 subjects there were 32 whose records permitted analysis of habitua-
         tion rate of the SCR during the tone series, The correl6atio-P between this measure of
         habituation and the -ime constant was very low and not si.-nificant. However, when.
         instead of SCR, fincer pulse volune chan(re was used as the response measure, the
         rate of habituation to tones sho%ved a si.-nifican'L correlation tc (r l')O, iN = 51,

                                                        46
               gression.  T'he tvo positive correlations found bet%,,,cen r-2covery limb tc ard different
               habituation measures indicatc that individuals with fast rccovery rates tend to habi-
               tuate more slowly (Table 5).
                                                   Conclusions
                      It has been demonstrated th2at the time constant or the half-time  of  the  recovery
               limb of the exosomadc electroder'mal response can be used to distinguish bet@,ieen a
               restino, state and a task state, between responses to the same physical stimulus under
               qualitatively different sets, bet@veen responses to the same stimulus at different  stages
               of habituation an;i finally between individuals2 Nvho habituate at different rates. In some
               cases, significant discrimination would also have  been rrade by  treatment  of  amplitude
               data but in other cases, amplitude could not have distinguished between the r@,;o condi-
               tioris. The rate of recovery accelerated markedly under three  conditions,  all  of  which
               involved activatioii from a resting state for performan2ce of a  task.  However  activation
               per se does not imply acceleration of the recovery limb.  Bursts  of  stroncr  spontaneous
               activity during "relaxation" periods were composed of EDRs showing the gentle recovery
               Limbs characteristic of isolated responses elsewhere in -.he  rest  period.  A  reasonable
               interpretation is that fast recovery rates reflect a mobilization for goal-directed be-
               havior2.  Spontar-eous activation during rest does not possess this quality. To the
               extent that slow habituation represents longer maintenance of a set to respond, the
               inter-indin,idual relation between fast recovery limbs and slow habituation rates is
               consistent with such an interpretation.  For the electrodermal (but not the vasomotor)
               response the difference in the relationship ben@reen7 tc and lia:oiti-,ation rate for the reaction
               tl-ne se-.ics, where it %,Iras appreciable, and for the tone se@ries, where it was.nccrL,.-ble,
                                                                                                 0 0-

                     T',,,csc        also      ai impo,,:-Lart iiiii)lica,,io,-i in to the nature of
              cicctrodc-.rlat -activity.  'llic rccovcry Liiiib time coiistaii@@ is a reslioiise cli-,ractcris-
              tic by which two exosomatic clec@Lrodcrnial responses nia,,- bo qu@,.Utatively differentiated
                                                                         .V
              according to the nature of the stimulus. Another nictliod is by comparison of relative
              amplitudes of palmar and dorsal finger respoiiscs                                 This
              stimulus specificity, to(,ctlier with the independence of tli:a recovery rate from a d2irect
              amplitl,de effect, its relation to the occurrence of positive components in the SPR and
              its relation to the occurrence of absorption waves suggests the C.'@-,istence of a second
              component in the EDR undar independent control. The steeper recovery slopes apparent-
              ly associated with goal-directed activation are viewed as representing the activity of
              a s-6%,,,eat reabsorption medhardsm which in some way serves as an adaptive process
              duripo- such beha%-ior,

                                                     v
         7       TI-IE- ELECI'I',CDERNli@L r,,T-CONIE-l@Y LL.%IB AS -,@N 1:\DL-X OF, COAL-DIRT--CTED
                 BLflj%VIOR
                 It was demonstrated in Section 6 Lliat the rate of rceovery of an cxosonlatic clec-
         tr2odermal response varies as t function of the state of behavioral activity of the in-
         din-idual, becoming faster when the subject clianaes from rest to any- of a variety of
         tasks.  The rate of recovery, %vliicli was expressed in terms of the time constLT',t (te)
         of the exponential re,-,ion of. the recovery limb, is faster in the presence of positive-
         going skin potential responses, -and in the presence of the recently discovered sweat
         reabsorption response                       Although observations in the initial study
         appeared to indicate that acceleration of recovery rate indicates a mobilization for
         goal-directed behavior, the evidence Nvas sug,-,estive rather t@an definitive. The tasks
         and stimuli used generally caused an increas2e in activation level as reflected in ele--tro-
         d--rmal activity or fir-crer vasomotor activity, and an equally t:anable hypotl,.ests would
         be that acceleration cf recovery rate merelk reflects @@ncreased general activation'.
         The obvious experiment needed is one in which activation is a--bieved in one instance
         by task perfori-nance, and in the other by a none-tas2l,, conditio-.i, for example, noxious
         st:imulation.  Such an experiment was one of the key aims of t-'ds experiment. iln
         addition fur,--her data to'evaluate the de-ree of the deperdence of recovery upon such
         things as response amplitude and base level were needed.  Information was also i--eded
         in regard to the stability of this measure in a given individual over a period of time.
         0This section deals with additional findings relev-lnt to some of these questions.
                                                     od
                 In one -hase cf this experiment a group of 16 m-,Ie medical stL:doi-,'Ls @,,-as -,:,I on

                                                          49
                 N@,cre monitored. Twelve of tl,,csc subjects @,,,crc tested on four successive occasio-,is
                 one week apirt, under the same stimulus  schedule,  Five  additional  subjects  were
                 run only on selected tasks from this list.
                        2Electroden-nal electrodes were applied, after iil-dch the subject was  seated
                 and a stabilization period of 12 minutes allowed,  The follonving schedule of conditions
                 was followed %%,itliout randomizincy the order. Constant order was used to allow maxi-
                 mum similarily of the 5 repeat sessions despite the danger of an uncontrolled order
                 effect.2
                 Sequence                Duration                                  Situation
                     1                   2 i-nin.                   Relax (eyes open)
                     2                   1 1/2  min.                Cou-it by ones at own  ace
                                                                                         p
                     3                   1 1/2  min.                Cou-it backward from2 500  by  7s.
                                                                    A new startino, point near 500
                                                                                 0
                                                                    was used on each successive week.
                     4                   1 1/2  min.                Take deep breaths on command
                                                                    (3 at app2roamately 30-second
                                                                    intervals)
                     5                   1 1/2  min.                Read aloud
                     6                   2 min.                     Mirror tracing
                     7                   2 min.                     Relax (eyes open)
                     8                   40 sec.                    Cold pressor  (hand  immersed  to
                                           0                            ct in ice water)
                                                                    wri.
                        Time constants were measured with the curve-matcmn(r overlay technique
                 described earlier, the farst useable @vave follo,,vir.9 the first 15 seconds of each pro-
                 cedure bei-ir taken as the sample. One req,,iiremert was that the wave  used  should

                                                               50
                 their recovery rates.  'nic an,cra-c of the initial and final rcsistance lc,,,cls for each
                 of the ei-ht procedures was coriiputed for each subject.
                                                            Results
                 Effect of Task, and Activation on Time Constan      t
                      2   The d-me constant (tc) was  found  to  vary  considb--ably  as  a  function  of  task-
                 situation, as  found  in  the  earlier  study,  The  range  of  time  constants  ran  from  an
                 average of 3. 1 seconds in the mirror tracing task to 7. 8 seconds for resting with eyes
                 closed.  The time constants for the 8 task conditions @vere ranked for each of 16 siib-
                 jects and the average rard,- for each task computed.  Results are seen in Table 6.  The
                 Table 6.  Averaoe ranks and standard deviations for each of 8 task, conditions on 16
                                   0
                            subjects..
                 ConditLon                     Order Run                      Rank                         S.D.
                 Rest (eyes closed)                   7                       2.5 (2longest tc)             1. 5
                 Rest  (eyes   ooen)                  1                       3.2                          1.5
                 Cold Pressor                         8                       3.3                          2.3
                 Deep Breath                          4                       4.2                          2.2
                 Count Fonvard                        2                       4.8            2              2,0
                 Count  Bac'zi@,,ard                  3                       5.2                          1.9
                 Read Aloud                           5                       5.9                          2.0
                 lurror      Tracing                  6                       6.4                          1.5
                 average ranks have b-ten arranced in order Nvith the longest tc a7t the top.  ne order
                 in wldch these procedures were run is also shown, and a Spearman's rho test irdi-
                 cated no sio-nira:--ant relarion benkeen the rarl',s of  the  time  constants  and  the  order
                 rim (rho =  -.05,  N.  S.).  AWilcoxon  signed-rar@,zs  test  sho@ved  that  many  of  t.Liese

                  0
                                                      51
               test) are shown in Table 7. Slo\vest recoveries were associated with the two rest
               conditions and with the cold pressor exposure. 'Dic remainin- conditions appear to
               rank themselves essentially in order of iiicreasing task complexity.
                     In view of the fact that recovery rate during the ice water exposure was not
 2              significantly different from that at rest, although that of.the last 4 tasks was, it
               appears that activation per se is not an adequate condition for acceleration of electro-
               dermal recovery. One may challenge the contention that the cold pressor was as
               activatin- as mirror tracing, but the report of stron(- pain by 14 of 16 subjects would
               suggest that there at least occurred the kind of arousal associated with 2strong noxious
               stimulation.  Moreover, mean skin conductance levels fcr the test population were
               very similar'for the col(f pressor and mirror tracing corditions, being 28.1 and
               27.6 micromhos/cm2 respectively (t = 0.36, N.S.). The rate of chan,-e of skin
               resistance during these two tasks also did not differ (t = 0. 12, N. S.), nor did the
               frequency of spon2taneous responses (t = 0. 12, N. S.). Thus, at least according to a
               few so-called el--ctrodermal activation measures, activation levels during ice water
               exposure and m-'-rror tracing were not demonstrably different, although both differed
               from the resting condition.
                      Twelve of the above 16 subjects were run once per week for 5 weeks a,-id an
               analysis of variance was performed 2on the time constants (Table 8). This also Oemon-
               strated a signif[cant difference between tasks (p <.001).
                      A final test of the sensitivity of tc to differences in task situ,'Ition was by
               analysis of the similarity of rankings of these tasks across the 16 subjects, using
               Kendall's Coefficient of Concordance. This confirmed the si,-nificance of the dlfferen-
       5        tiation (@V = .31, X2 = 34, p <.001).

                                                             52
                Table 6.   Averige ranks and starciarcl, deviations for cacti  of  S  tas'.@  conditicrs  on
                           16 subjects.
                Condition                   Order Run                          Bank                          S.D.
                Rest (eyes closed)               7                             2.5  Oongest tc)           2    1.5
                Rest (eyes open)                 I                             3.2                            1.5
                Cold Pressor                     8                             3.8                            2.3
                Deep Breath                      4                             4.2                            2.2
                Count Fon%,ard                   2                             4.8                          2  2.0
                Count Backivard                  3                             5.2                            1.9
                Read Aloud                       5                             5.9                            2.0
                Mirror Tracing                   6                             6.4                            1.5
                Table 7.  Levels of significance of Wilcoxon signed-ranks test for various con-Lbinations
      2                    of task situations.
                                            Back-@vard        Deep             Cc-Id     Rest (Eyes Rest (Eyes
                Condition                    Counting        Breath         Pressor         Open)          Closed)
                ,Mi-rror Tracing                .05            .02            .01           .002           .005
                Reading Aloud                                  .203            .03           .02            .005
                Back-%%,ard Counting                                                                       .005
                Deep Breath                                                                                .1
                Stability of the Time Constant in Receated Trials
                        Not only did the tc offer a stable  index  of  differences  bet'Nveen  task  s2ituations,
                but also of differences bet@veen  subjects.  The  analyses  of  variance  of  the  tc's  of  12
                subjects run in t:ie eight task  situations  on  each  of  5  consecutive  weeks  (Table  8)
                demonstrated a significant  difference  between  subjects  (p  <.001).  In  add,,tio,-.i  there
                was a si-0, ificant task-by-subject interaction  Co  <.005)  as 2 well  as  the  difference  be-
                t,,veen t--s':'-S al4-eady noted.

                                                                              0
                                                    53
             Table S. Analysis of N-arian,cc of time constant data from 12 subjects, run in 12 task
                       situations on 5 consecutive wecks
                                                  Mean
             Source                 df           Square             F                 p
             Subjects              2 11           109.7            14.5              <.001
             Ta s k.9                1           355.0            47.0              <.001
             Subjects x Tasks       11            28.4             3.&              <. 005
                   An indication of the stability of this measure on repeated trials was obtained
             by examining the de-ree to which the 12 subjects maintained the same rank for2 a
             given task, over the 5 sessions. The KendaLl Coefficient of Concordance for the
                                               2
             Backivard Counting task Nzas .53 (,X= 29, p < . 01) and for the cold pressor exposure
                  2
             .65 (,X= 36, p< .001). These results indicate that a given subject may show variation
             in time constant accordino- to the 2task, but the magnitude of his time constants takes
             a characteristic position in relation to the rest of the population. 'The 5-wee@,, data
             for the backward c-@-,Lnting task are presented graphically in Figure 19.  Each vertical
             line represents the 5-week mean and + I standard deviation of one of the 12 subjects.
             They have been ranked in order of their mean time constants (upper series) and rate
      2       constants @ower series). The rate constant scale increa-.es downnvard.  L\Tote that
             fast recovering subjects are consistently fast and slow recovering subjects are con-
             sistently slow. Note also that the rate constant shows less dependence of variance
             i,non mean (r = -D. 2 1) than does the time constant (r = 0. 34). Tne solid circles
             represe.,it the mean rate constants fo3r the cold pressor ccndition over the five weeks
             aud in everl case they are slower than those for backivard countino,. An e.--,amole of
                                                                                p           I
             the range of time cons'Lant means over the S conditions for the 5 weeks for a single

                                                        a
               Figure 19. i%leans and + 1 SD of recovery limb time constants (uppet group) and
               rate constants (lower group) for each of 12 subjects tested over 5 consecutive
               weeks.  Vertical line data are for the backward countinc, task. So@d circles
               represent the correspondin(r means for the cold pressor rate9 constants.
                                          0

                                                      5
               subject chosen ac ranc!om is given in Figure 20.  Eacli @y,ertical line represents the
               mean time constant + 1 stan(iard deviation.
                     Thus the recovery limb measure, preferably its rate constant, constitutes a
               rather stable measure of differences in behavioral situations, and appears to reflect
               the l2evel of involvement in goal-oriented performance., Tt is capable of discrimination
               under conditions in which base conductance level and (from the earlier study) skin
               conductance response amplitude do not.
               Relation of te to Conductance Level
                     Although conductance usually increases when a resting subject becomes activated
               for a task, there is no reason to suspect a necessary correlation between co2nductance
               and tc, i..e., that the t@vo are causally related. If the type of activation which produces
               a rise in conduc:ance does not entail mobilization for a aoal-directed task-, it is to be
               expected that the correlation would break down. Thi.s predictio.1-was tested upon a
               o-roup of 21 subj--cts. Two tasks were chosen, both activatincr, but only one of em
                   2                                                         0                 th
               involving a cognitive task. The first was a Cold Pressor exposure, the second, the
               BacNivard Counting task.  Correlations were essentially as predicted.  The Pearson's
               r between SC and tc during Cold Pressor wa@ -. 23 (,N. S.) whereas that for Bac-l,-@,,,ard
               Counting was -0.49 (p < .03). The @bove determinations are in themselves inadequate
               to justify the conclusion that ic is independent of skin conductance level. Another
               an.-ilysis does, however, point toward such a conclusion. The data for the above cor-
               rel,@ion-il analysis was subjected to a t-test for differences betveen tas't,-s. The time
                         were si@,milli7cantly different (p <.01), but the SC levels were not.

                                                                                       JF
                                    REC RI-0       CP      DB     CF     CB     RA     MT
                  Figure 20. %4eans and + I @D of recovery limb time constants for a single subject
                  for each of 8 conditions over a series of 5 consecutive weeks. Abbreviations are:
                  REC  resting (eyes closed); REO, resting (eve1s open); CP, cold pressor; DB, deep
                  breaths; CF, countin(r fonvard-, CB, countincr bact,-\vard; RA, reading aloud, @\IT,
                  mirror tracino-.

                r-',clation of   Co,-sLar.L to
                      The earlier intcrprctitioii IliLt the re.-OverY lin,,b ciiilc co;istiit rclaEC(i to
                mobilization for goal-dircctect activity implied a relation between the degree to which
                mobilization occurred an(I the level of pcrf-,-niince. The relationships bcc%,Iccn tc
                and two measur-2s of performance in ttic r>ack--",ard Couiitin ' (by 7's) task were examined.
                                                                           9
                One measure was the nuiiiber of errors made, the other die rate of counting. 2The
                number of errors was determined by determining the number of times subtraction of
                seven from die Drevious nun-Lber was in error. 'I-he rate was expressed in terms of
                total span for die back-@%,ard count in the 90 seconds allowed.  Results on a population
                of 12 showed that subjects widi sliort'er time constants tended to count faster (t = 1. 96)
                and to make f2ewer errors (t = 1. 82).  Lev--Is of confiderce for these, using a t@vo-
                tailed test, were at the 0. I level.  (Note: Althounli the direction was predicted, this
                investigator has discontinued the use of one-tailed tests).
                Functional Interpretation
                       In loo.Ung for a functional interpretation, one may point to the results of
                experiments over the last sever2al years which show the relation of the recovery limb
                to rate of reabsorption of sweat.  In some rec6nt experiments, a iew method has been
                utilized for demonstratilig this relation.  If a prisni is illuminated for maximum internal
                reflection and placed on the skin as was done by                     sweat droplets
                adoear as black points on a white field. 7bis method may be carr'ie@ to its looical
                next stage, namely, the placement of a photocell at the proper point in the light path
                to irtegra-,e and follow the field of punctate sweat droplets.  Fig,,ire 2.1 shows such a
                re--ordin-. The abbrc,.,iation OSR refers to N@.,Iiat I call :he oc-tical s%@.,eat resoo.,is--, the

                  C)       F--l
                  ;A       (D
                           cn
                  El       ".
                  0
                                                                                                                                               
4C)
                           CD                                                                                2                 -0
                                                                                                                                               
cn
                           0                                                                                                  (A               
m
                      c@,
                      0          6CD
                                 Z3
                                 C-L                                                                                                           
qp
                                 0

                                                      36
              covered by a glass plate, do not simply accumulate on die surface during and follow-
              ing a response, but are immediately reabsorbed, so that d2spfte continuing activity,
              the moisture content of the surface remains relatively constant. 'Me second point
              of interest is that when the skin conductance trace shows slow recovery limbs a2s in.
              the upper pair, so does the optical sweat response as compared with the lower pair
              in which electrical and optical recovery rates are rapid. Such demonstrations, along
              with those already reported using other methods, imply that changes in the recovery
              limb are at least in part indicative of a change in the rate of the reabsorption process.
                    Because differences in the state of hydration of the 2skin surface are known to
              influence tactile and manipulative performance, one is tempted to hypothesize that
              control of reabsorption, like control of sweating, may be part of the  adaptive  prepara-
              tion for these'types of behavior. This may explain the apparent relation of recovery
              rate to mobilization for goal-oriented performance.
                                                 Conclus ions
                     The time co2nstant measure appears to be capable of reflecting differences in '-e-
              havioral s,.tuations with a relatively high resolution. it h,7s been demonstrated to dis-
              criminate when the base level measures did'not, and in the earlier study when amplitude
              did not.  It is rel-atively stable over tl-ime, at least insofa-r as the position of an individual
              in a group is concerned.  Finally, since te is l0o:@gest with the subject at rest or exposed
              to a cold pressor task, and becomes   progressively shorter  as  the  task  becomes  more
              goal-di.rected fcalculat-ion, reading, and mirror tracing), the findings support the
              earlier interpretation of tc as reflecting mobili@zation for goal-directed performance.

                     0
                                                       S2
              12.    @',,Sr'Ul 4R EFFE-.CTS t'PON SL,'IN FO'rl'%
                          -   @:,%            I
                     Altllou-h'
                                                                            -Iproduced    experi-
              mental evi(iance 2rjiat vascular clian,,,,cs play oiily a ne-ligible role, If any, In
              "CcOunting for clectrodermal activity,  tllc focus of these Oxperinic-nts was upon
              conductancc clian,cs. The possil)ility that vasomotor effects could account for at
              le.ast some skin potcntiil clianri-es remained. Tne observation that2 potential  re-
              spctt.ses could bc- recorded from the nail bed which is devoid of sweat giands
                               su<-r,rested that blood vessels mfght indeed account for some pot-
              enEL'al shilrts observable at the skin surface,
                     TWs studv examines the possible      le of -vasomotor chan,,es in producing
                                  2                      ro
              change of surface potential. The approach was to ixiduce alterations in  the  state
              of peripheral vessels by  mechanical  means  And  to  observe  any  corc@)mitant  potential
              changes not ascrib'able to central reflex effect.  Venous  occlusion  was  used  as  a
              -iethod for engorgl-ig the veins while maintaining flow  and  arterial  occlusion  for
             2 inter-zupting flow %vithout engorgement.  A  simultaneous  recording  of  a  no.'I-occluded
              homologous con@alateral s      ivould ser,,,e as a control fo2: centrally induced  changes
              la potential.
                                                     ivethod
                     St.@bjects v@,ere 11 males and 2 fe,-nales in t,ie age range from IS to 42.  Ski0n
              poter.cial (SP) was recorded from the palmar and the dorsal surfaces of the middle
              phalan,x o'L tlie mfddle finger of each hand. Each site  was  recorded  with  reference  to
              an inactive skin site above the ipsilateral clavicle. This  -reference  was  chosen  to  be
              oi.itside Llic occluded re-ion so that comr-.on-mode effects %%@ould ror cancel out elicited

                                                     83
               changes. A direct-couplecl reflectance pieLh),sii,.ogral)li was attached to the d,)rsurn
               of the middle segment of the index fin,,cr of the experinicntal arni, I.e., the arm
                                                   0
               around which the blood pressure cuff was placed2.
               Procedure
                     The pressure cuff around the upper part of the experimental arm was rapidly
               inflated to 60 mm Hg or to 180 mm Hg and kept at that p:essure for one minute.
               Following deflation at the end of the one minute period oil inflation a rest period of
               one to two minutes preceded the next inflation. Each S received at least 5 trials at
               60 and at least 4 at ISO mm Hg. The experimental arm was alternated from one S
               to the next. Lfflation of the cuff to 60 mm Hg prevented venous return from the arm
               and lead the arm to become engorged distal to the cuff due to the unimpeded arterial
               flow. Inflation to ISO mm Hg collapses both the arterial and vecous systems, thereby
               completely occluding blood flow to the arm below the cuff. Plethysmographic record-
               ings co2nfirmed these differential hemodynamic effects associated with the t-,vo levels
               of pressure.
               Data Treatment
                       The analysis was guided by the need to answer two experimental questions.
                                                                               ations of SP at
               -.First, does e,.ther of the two inflation pressures result in fluctu
               experimental sites and not at control sites? Se7cond, if shifts of SP level are demon-
                strated for the experimental sites, are these shifts different for venous engorgement
                than for arterial occlusion?
                        Each of Lic four SP channels was scored identically. Since it appeared that the
                neriod of zreatest change in the t-,,,7o exper,,rre.@ital char-nels occurred about 5 seconds

                                                       4
                                                      -Z
              after the release of pressure, this point was chosen as an arbitrary reference.
              The slope of SP 6uring tile 10 seconds precedin- t[iis point was determined by
              measuring the difference in potential between the ref2erence point and a second point
              10 seconds earlier.  I,ikewise the SP slope was also found between the reference
              point and tjic level of SP at a point" 10 seconds later. If tJ-;e change during any 10
              second period was towards increasing pos-Ltivity the slope score was also assigned
              a positive sign, and conversely. A change score (,6-slope) was calculated from
      2        the tnvo slopes by taking the absolute difference between them. Thus, each     slope
              score represented the magnitude of the aloebraic change in slope bet-@,veen the first
              and last 10 seconds of the 20-second scoring period, independent of the direction of
              change.
                                                    Results
              Comparison of ExT)erimental Versus Control Sites
                  2   It was predicted that either engorgement, occlusion or both would lead to
              alterations in SP levels at the experimental sites but not at control sites. This
              assumption was tested by a bet,.veen-S comparison of A -slope scores between
              experimental and control s ites . Analys es N@ere ac'compl [shed s eparateli for the
              180 mm and 60 mm conditions and, within each of these, palmar and dorsal compar2-
                                             -ately. Irt each of these four conditions, the average
              Lsoi-L-s were also exam,ined sepa3.
                 -slope score of the control site was computed for each S. These average n-slope
              scores for experimental and control sites across subjects were subsequently sub-
              jected to analysis by t-tests for correlated means. The results of the four bet-,veen9-.S
              t-tests are summarl-ed in Table 15.

                                                                                   0
              Table 15. Change  in  slope  of  SP  after  release  of  pressure:  between-S  comparisons
                          of experimental vs. control sites.
                                                                Pressure Level
              Site                             60 mm Hg                                180 mm Hg
         2     Dorsal                              3.30*                                   5.74*
              Palniar                             3.40*                                   5.25*
              *p < .01
              The significant levels of these t analyses indicate that, for the group as a Nvhole, there
              were la-rger shifts at experimental sites than at control sites. This was true for both
           2   palmar and dorsal regions and for both 60 and 180 mm Hg.
                     An effort was also made to examine the intra-subject reliabilittl of this effect.
              This was accomplished, for each of the 13  Ss,  by  computing  four  t-rests  for  correlated
              means, based on the distribution of his t@, -slope scores  across  trials.  Table  16  in-
              dicates how many of these 52 coi-nparisons were significant (2i.e., magnitude of SP
              change greater at experimental than at      ntrol sites), and at what level of  significance.
              Table 16. Change in slope of  skin  potential:  within  S  comparisons  of  experimental  vs.
                          control sites. Values are in terms of the frequency of each  level  of  sigiiifi-
                          cance obtained by t-test.
                                                                 Signi2ficance    Level
              Condition                          .01             05                .10           Nlons ig.
              60 mm H  -Dorsal                     7              1                2                  3
                       9
              60 mm Hg - Palniar                   5              I                1                  6
              180 ,nm Hg - Dorsal                 10              0                1                  2
              180 mm Hg - Palmar                   9              2                0                  2

                                                       S5
              Table 15.   Change in slope of SP after release of pressure: bct%@,,ccn-S  comparisons
                          o.f experimental vs. control sites.
                                                               Pressure Level
              Site                            60 riim l@Ig                          180 mm Hg
              Dorsa2l                             3.30*                                 5.74*
              Palmar                             3.40*                                 5.25*
              *p <.Ol
              The significant levels of these t analyses indirate that, fDr the group as a whole, there
              were larger shifts at experimental sites than at control sites. This was true for both
              palmar and dorsal regions and for both 602 and 180 mm Hg.
                     An effort was also made to examine the intra-subject reliability of this effect.
              This @%,as accomplished, for each of the 13 Ss, by compu:ing four t-tests for correlated
              mee.ns, based on the distribution of his A -slope scores across trials. Table  16  in-
              dicates how many of these 52 comparisons were significant (i.e., magnitude of SP
              change greater at experimental 2than at control sites), and at what level of significance.
              Table 16.  Change in slope of skin potential: within S comparisons of experimental vs.
                          cont::ol sites.  Values are in terfns of thifrequency of each level of sig-Liifi-
                          cance obtained by t- test.
                                                               Significance Level
              Condition                         .01           2.05              .10            Nonsig.
              60 rr,,m Hg - Dorsal               7               1              2                 3
              60 mm Hg - Palrnar                 5               1              1                 6
              180 mm Hg - Dorsal                 10             0               1                 2
              180 mm Hg - PaLmar                 9               2              0    5             2

                                                       86
              As can be scei from this table, at least 8 of t!ic 13 Ss in cacti grol.,p, except
              60 mm Hg-Palmar, demonstrated t values si(,-,iificant at the .05 level or better.
              In addition, the physiological recordings for certain comparisons which were not
              significant, clearly appeared to show the experimental,effect, but due to variability
              of the control site significance was not obtained.
              iolarity of SP Shift as a Function of Venous vs. Arterial Occlusion
                     The first two analyses confirmed the existence of a shift in SP slope at a  point
              approximately 5 seconds after release of pressure. The two sites on the experimental
              hand exhibited significantly greater SP fluctuations than control sites2 for both 180 and
              60 mm Hg. . However, the pattern of change in SP seemed different for these two degrees
              of pressure. Typically, with the initiation of venous  occlusion,  SP  became  gradually
              more negative during occlusion and upon release reversed this trend and became more
              positive beginnin- about 5 seconds after release. 7bis cont'rast@d with the  pattern  of
              SP change induced by 2arterial occlusion. In this condition SP dipped sharply towards
              increasina- positivity about mid@vay through the in flation p2riod and then changed to a
              more negative level, again beginning at a point about 5 seconds followincr deflatio.,i.
                     These distinct response patterns for 60'and 180 mm Hg may be illustrated
              simply by counting the number of Ss whose SP tended to s.ii2ft in a positive direction
              following the termii-lation of venous occlusion and in a negative direction upon the
              conclusion of arterial occlusion. Table 17 contains these figures,  In three groups
              there was nearly complete congruence; all Ss but one shifted in parallel directions.
              Five Ss in the 6'ul mm Hg-Dorsal cell shifted in a negative direct,-on, but for only
              two of these Ss was this paradox,.c4al reversal -,t all proncunced.

                                                87
             Table 17.  Fre-luency and averige niagiitudc of positive and nc-&,@ative SP sllifts
                       after release of pressure (experfniont,,il sites o.,ily).
                              Pos. Shift  Neg. Shift         Pos.            X ineg.
             60 mm ILiz
      2       Dorsal                8           5           0. 3i niv
             Palmar               13           0           0. 17 mv
             180 mm-!!g
             Dors'al               0          13                             0.73 mv
             Palmar                1          12                             0.56 mv
                   The average magnitudes of the positive shifts occurring at the offset of 60 mm
     2        and of the negative shift following the end of a 180 mm trial are listed In the last two
             .columns of Table 17. The five subjects whose mean che-nge was negative were not
             included in the 60 mm Dorsal mean; likewise, the one subject foi whom a positive
             sliift appeared after 180 trials and not added to the 180 mm Palmar group for this
             analysis. As these magnitude figures indicate, chan2ges of SP levels that occurred
             in relation to 180 mm Hg trials were more salient than 1-he less marked shifts assocfateii
             with the 60 mm Ho- conditio,-i.
                                              Summary
                    It has been demonstrated that certain changes in surface potential are consistently
             brought about by manipulation of vas cular state. These changes are particularly marked
           6  during the sudden return from the altered state and may iridlcate a local reflex involving
             compensatory changes in smooth muscle of the blood vessels. This exideriment does

               not demonstrate that s-,tc!i clianges are also produced by central ei'^ccs but such
               a likeliliood is rnade pliusiblc by dicsc findings. Wltitc sccon(!.Iry alterations,
               of sweat glands, could explain ttiese data, the most parslinonious explanation Is
               that they rcflccc local vasoniotor alterations.

