                                                                             Aillih
                                                                             w
                              l@larch 20, 1967
     Dr.
     Dear Dr.
     Attached is a proposii fbz'a Research Contract, Physiological
     ,Mechanisms Underlying the. Electrodermal,Response and their
     Behavioral, Significance 'wftich will 2allow continuation and extension
     of,work performed under ou \roriginal  Contra.ct
                      The designated principal'Lnvestigator would again
     be Dr.                - I It is 'requested t]@at this contract, if
     approved, become efl'ective june'l, 1967.
                               S%erely yours,
                                                                  Approved for  Release
                                  2                                            @3 -Ii
                                       maul @l

                                                 Prop
                                                    _qsa
                                        Piiysiological \4echanisms
                                 Underlylng the Electrodermal Response
                                     and their Behavicral Significance
                                                  From
                                             March 207, 1967

                    Period of Work
                        This proposal woule cover one year of effort.
                    Facilities
               '-@-@a    t@iori-td'equipm'ent originally available, there isno-'w--'an additional 4-cha
                    D.C. polygraph purchased under the current contract, and a 2-channel magnetic
                    .tape recorder with FM compoients for recording of biolcgi2cal signals.
                    Amount of Support
                        An estimate of costs is attached.  Contract-lat firtancial ar-rangements are
                    proposed as exist under the current contract with the exception that indirect costs
                    be calculated at the negotiated rate of 30 percent.
                    Ref)orts
                                @@pose@d-t  a@schedullng-of  pro.gress rep4orts-be'c6ntinued on the. same.
                                          -Contrdet
                    Principal Invest

                 Cost Estimate
                     FrLncipal investigator (part-time)
                     Research Assistant (full-time)
                     Electronics Techniciaii (half-time)
                     Subjects
                     Stenographic Services
                     Reproduction Services
                     Expendable Supplies (Paper, chemicals, electron ic components, etc.)
                     Solid state special purpose comput9er components
                     Impedance Bridge
                     Magnetic -Recording Tape
                     Travel @(2:coordinati@@@
                                                                 Sub-To@al
                                          Overliead at 307( (LNegotiaced Ea'-e)
                                                                      Tol.al

                             PHYSIOLOGICAL NIECI[ANISNIS UNDERLYING THE
                 ELECTRODERP@LNL RESPONSE AND THEIR BEHAVIORAL SIGINIFICANCF,
                1.  INT.RODUCTION
                Reference is maje to the description of kic@g-@gtnq and statement of proposed
                work described under current contract                                    r i rTtnT @ Ed
                in June 1966.  FL:rtlier reference is madtto an interim 'Progress Report dated
                February 15, 1967, which  describes  progress  to  January  31,  1967.  The  original
                contract was aimed at a systematic investigation of the basic physiological
                mechanisms responsible for electrodermal reflex events in the hopes that the
                understanding of their nature would aid i)2ehavioral iriterpretation and afford a
                rational basis for effective data treatment.  Attention was to be given to the
                relative involvement (or lack of involvement) of vasomotor, sudom6tor and
                epidermal activi ty in this reflex, to the special characteristics of the  response
                which might be associated with each component, to the,  prin--iples  governing  the
                addition of 2component activities '* and to the specific classes of stimuli which
                evoke activity in the respective components. Efforts were @_,o be  made  to  identify
                the nature of the biological adaptaton signified by the activity  of  each  component
                in efforts to recognize their psychological significance.
                The initial phases of this work (as described in  the  February.15,  1967,  interim
                progre2ss report) consisted of experiments as follows:
                       (a) Comparison of microelectrode recordings from sweat pores and
                areas between sweat pores. These have since been extended to comparison of
                surface recordings with those at the deepest level of the stratum corneum.
                       (b) Comparison of recordings from the corneum in different states of
                hydration.
                       (c) Recording2s from cat foot-pad under'varying patterns of s-@-imulatioa
                of the sympathetic nerve supply.
                       (d) Recordings of potential responses from the r,,al.1 :)late which is
                allegedly free of sweat glands.
                       (e) Study of the effect of surface electrolytes on the  specific  components
                of the skin potential response.
                       (f) Production of local ele8ctrodertnal responses by mechanical stimulation
                (calibrated stretch) and alteration of this response by cliemi-cal agents,  ischemia,
                temperature change, and combl-iation with activity of central origin.

                                                     -2-
                            ExarnLriation of the effects on skin potential response of  vascular
               changes produced by engorgement (venous cuff), arterial occlusion, or
               exsanguination by a directed massage.
                       (h) Comparison of electroder-mal behavior as measured by constant
               voltage vs constz.-it current systems.
           2    The results of these experiments together with  those  alreadv  reported  in  the
               literature were utilized in the development of a  new  hypothesis  describing  the
               peripheral proce@ses involved in the elect-roderrnal response. 'Ibis model,
               described in the interim report,  ascribes  conductance  changes  having  a  slow
               recovery rate and negative potential waves, also of slow recovery rate, to the
             2  rise of sweat in the ducts. 'rbe fast recovering conductance wavi@s and the
               positive potential waves are attributed to behavior of a neurally controlled
               membrane readuv accessible to surface solution, and involved in the rapid
               reabsorption of water fron-t the skin surface. An analysis of the manner in
               which these comp:)nents combine was used to  explain  the  co  -nplex  wave  forms
               o2btained under actual recordng conditions.
               From this model it wa7s concluded that the half-time of the recovery process of the
               skin conductance response should be a meaningful index of the  arrm)unt  of  fast-
               recovering (membrane) component in the response.  A seric-s of behavioral
               experiments was analyzed with the use of this index to determ@ ine whether it
               distinguished d2ifferent behavioral states, for example, alerdng  for  a  task  as
               opposed to execution of the task, and relaxing as opposed to task performance.
               The measure successfully-di,5tingLilshed between these conditio@s even       cascs
                                                                  to do so.
               11. PROPOSED INVESTIGATIONS
                       A.  Contiriuation of Physiological Investiga2tion
                       Although considerable progress has beert made  in  clarifying  the  nature
               of peripheral mechanisms, several important questions remain to be resolved.
               These will receiv-3 continued investigation in terms of experiments described in
               the current contract. Among these are:
                                1. Does the nail bed in fact represent a sweat-gland free
               area and, if so, may vascular 2processes  explain  the  nail  potential  responses
               of central origin and the lo(@al positive potential responses obtained by mechanical
               displacement? This will be investigated by simultaneous recordings of skin
               potentials and reflectance plethysmographic changes from the nail plate.  Efforts
               will also be made to alter the potential responses with electrolytes applied to the
               nail plate, to test for a surfac9e membrane effect.

                                     2.  Do  local  potential  responses  (prcduced   mechanically)
                   depend upon z,  surface  membrane  alone,  or  may  a  vascular   component   be
                   involved? TI)c effect of surface ;igciits ajid cxsaiiguinatio--i experiments  point
                   to a surface membrane as the responsible cle2r-nent but surface reflectance
                   monitoring undertaken since the last interim report de.-noiistratesa marked
                   similarity between the form of the local potential  responce  and  that  of  the
                   change of surface optical opackty followiiig the nieci-,anical stimulus even in the
                   exsang,uinated -extremity.  The attack- on i-iiis problem will consist of attempts
                   to selectively extinguish either the local potential response (e.g., with surface
                   tariaestlieties) or the vasomotor  accompaniment,  e.g.,  by  using  et(-,ctrical  or
                   vibratory stiniuli to produce the local response.
                                    3.  Is the activity of the sweat gland observable at the surface
               2    only as a secondary effect of ttie rise of sweat in the ducts, or are there
                   electrical changes at the s.ecretory membrane which cortribute to the surface
                   potential respolise?           nd his  co-work-ers  have  shown  that  Lntra-ductat
                   electrodes in t-@e cat sw      and do not  indicate  responses  when  they  are.
                   inserted deeper than the  level  of  the  germinating  laye2r.  Ftecent  experiments
                   under the present contract indicate that the human sweat gland behaves
                   differently in t--iat responses may be recorded at deeper levels.  It remains
                   to be decided whether these are due to pickup from nearby structures or in
                   fact originate in the sweat gland.
                                    4.  In addition to the three critical questions stated above,
              2     numerous lines of  approach  to  the  clarification  of  mechanisms,  described  in
                   the original proposal, reml ain to be undertaken. Special attention will be givea
                   to the combination of high frequency impedance measurement with potential and
                   D.C. resistanep, measurement,, and to the effects of pre-exposure to various cu--reat
                   densities upon the positive and negative waves and2 upon sweat gland and epidermal
                   responses,
                          B.  Development of the Recovery Half-Time Index
                          because of the high success with which the t/2 recovery index distinguishes
                   qualitatively different behavioral states, a keye:fort in the continuing program
                   will be directed toward rendering this mezisure maximally effective.  T'@-is
                   investigation shall b2e concerned wi  :
                                    1.  The development of a method for automatic on-line
                   presentation of the recovery limb index.
                                    2.  The determination as to whether some fraction of the recovery
                   time other than 5070, e.g., one third recovery to base line, is a more sensitive
                   measure.  Various fractions of the recovery time are rea&-ty selected by the automati3c
                   circuitry now planned for this operation.

                           Alik                                                       .
                                                       -4-
                                    3. The determination of the extent of the amplitude range
                     in which this measure maintains its independence of amplitude.
                                    4. The relationship of changes in the recovery index to
                     various peripheral phy2siological processes as deterrniried by independent
                     measures su-ch as vapor production, A.C. vs D.C. impedance, etc.
                                    5. The classes of stimuli which tend to pro&-ce shortening
                     or lengthening of the recovery index.
                                    6. The I ability of this measure during short term alteration of
                     stimulus conditions.
                       2    C. Application of Electrodermal Measures as Indices of Bio-Psychologit;al
                               Adaptability
                           The @nterpretation of electrodermal activity as a biologically useful   -
                     adaptation implies that its occurrence La response to a,-t arousing situation may
                     indicate effective behavior. There are, however, two -additional requirements
                     which must be evidenced 2by the behavioz sample before this conclusion can be
                     reached, na-.nely that the type of adaptation be approprlate to the demands of the
                     situation both qualitatively and quantitatively. The first implie% for example,
                     that a defensive response to a situation which appropriately calls for maximum
                     information intake is ineffective behavior. ne second implies that autonomic
                     ac2tivation should be graded in proportion to the situational demand$ and most
                     important, that the activation shctuld rapidly diminish as soon as the demands of
                     the situation are reduced. In other words the effective individua , in the irlterests
                     of biologica'L economy.,would not remain continuously a::tivated, but should be able
                     to shift rapidly to the resting state while maintaining a system of sentrins for
                     defense purposes. He should then be canable, upon being alerted by his sentries
                     (i.e., his r-2ceptive screen) to shift gears rapidly to the activated state. The
                     dissection c,-f the electrodermal response iitto qualitatively dilferent adaptive
                     reflexes syould allow evaluation of the qualitative appropriateness of the
                     elici2ted activation. The recovery index should allow observation of shifts in arousal
                     even when the amplitude of the background activity, fails to differentiate functional
                     states.
                     The appraisal of an individual's adaptability to environmental demands will be
                     determined by exposing him to a sequence of rest conditions'.alternated at
                     unannounced times with tasks or s2tresses of varying e-emands (qualitatively and
                     quantitatively)* An index of adaptability will bq cortst.-ucted from the rapidity of
                     activation and (especially) relaxation and the degree to which it is qualitatively
                     appropriate to the task in terms of three categories of behavioro defense,,
                     aggressive task orientation, or information intake. This adaptability index will
                     be validated a7gainst personal histories Cob or military), clinical judgement of
                     behavior, and performance on a battery of tasks aimed at assessing this ability.

                                                                               AMhk
                                                                                   'T
                                                                     ATTAC!i'.%lE:N -B
                                                                     to
                                                              "vas selected
                         4                                                I
                    for this follow-on action because'of,the  excellert @er
                                                              Dr.
                                                nve
                    forn-La@nce of the prin,cipa
                                during the initial con4@ract period.

