                                ON THE INATURE OF ELECTROSENSING IN THE FISH
                                             August 1971

                                          ABSTRACT
               An evaluative review of the electrosensing literature was carried out
          with the intention of determining the nature o-l' the electrosensing mechanism
          and its sensitivity.  It was found that the biological data base was weak.  It
          was, however, useful in the development of a mathematical model and mathematical
          analyses of the sense mechanism and its function. 5 In the course of the analyses,
          we suggest a working hypothesis on the nature of the sense mechanism.  We also
          collapse the various sensor coding schemes that have been proposed into one
          scheme.  The function of the mathematical model of the sensor that was developed
          was explored with the use of a cnmputer.  The fishes' function at the system
          level was also considered and possible..-mechanisms defined.

                                                TABLE OF CONTENTS
                   ABSTRACT
                   INTRODUCTION  ..................................................
                   NATURE OF THE BIOLOGICAL SYSTEM        ......................................  2
                   Generator Organ         .....................................................  3
                   Receptor Organ .................................................    0  ......  T
         2              Gymnotid receptors.
                       Mormyrid receptors.
                   System Function, Measurement Technique & Sensitivity          .................. 11
                       Electrophysiological & behavioral techniques
                       Size of tank requir d for valid experimental data.
                   POSSIBLE RECEPTOR MECHANISM AND NEURAL CODING          ......................... 1T
                       Mechanism.
                       2Coding.
                   MODEL:  DEVELOPMENT, FUNCTION, AND SENSITIVITY          ........................ 2T
                   Receptor Level        .......................................................  28
                       Development.
                       Function.
                       Sensitivi
                   System Leve'L         ........................................................... 54
                   CONCLUSIONS          .................................5.......................... 55
                   REFERENCES          ............................................................ 58
                   AppENDix          .............................................................. 61

                                            INTRODUCTION
                   It has only been a short time since certain fish were identified as
              having a previously unknown sensing system, an electrosensing system.  It
              was observed that these fish apparently detect and classify objects that
              enter into and perturb a weak electrical field that the fish itself gener-
              ates.  With further investigation it was found that this sen2se is more
              generally found among fishes than was first thought. Data also  appeared
              indicating that some fish, such as the shark and goldfish, use a passive
              electrosensing system in that the fish does not seem to generate its own
              electrical field.  Rather, it seems'to detect electrical signals, possibly
              muscle potentials, generated by objects coming into its area.
                   Although there is now a fairly substantial d2ata base, we find  that
              very little can be applied to the development and understanding of sense
              mechanism and sensitivity.  This is due in part to the fact that pioneering
              data in this area, as it is in most areas, tend to have faults no matter
              how competent the investigators.  Further, the data base contains very little
              behavioral data.  Thus, there is little information available on system sensi-
              tivity and function2.
                    In sum, though there are individual investigators contributing quite
              useful data to the data base, as a whole the data base is weak.  Thus, we
              have undertaken several tasks which may allow an assessment of the fishes'
              electrosensing mechanism and capability, using the data presently available.
                    First, through limited experimental work with electrical fields, sen-
              sors, and objects in various size 2bodies of water we have gathered data which,
              when taken with the mathematical analysis, allows us to interpret much of the
              data now available.  This analysis also provides a specification for tank size,

               fish location, and attacnments, that will yield valid data in  future  studies.
                     Second, we have suggested as a working hypothesis an electrosensor
               mechanism.  This hypothesis is subject to test and ',hereby may provide the
               means for collapsing the current multiple crude categorizations of the re-
               ceptor that is so typical of a new area of investigation.  The  hypothesis  may
               also2 provide a basis for analyzing higher interactions in the  fishes'  nervous
               system and thereby increase our understanding of the sense.
                     Third, we indicate in the following the linkage among -,%--,he various neural
               coding schemes suggested for the fish and show their essential identity.
                     Fourth, we develop a mathematical model of the fish based upon  the  use-
               able experimentpl data. A set of equations describing2  function  is  developed
               on the model. These equations are linked to available  experimental  data.
               The mathematical model is analysed by a computer to ascertain  the  sensitivity
               requirements of the fish at the receptor and to determine the effects of mani-
               pulating a number of variables.  These variables include fish size, object
               size, object 'electrical characteristics, object distance from the fish, direction
          2     and angle of the object from the fishes' axis, etc.
                     We briefly discuss the fishes' function at the systems level  and  close
               with our conclusions concerning the electric sense.
                                     NATURE OF THE BIOLOGICAL SYSTEM
                     Both marine and fresh water species of strongly and weakly  electric
               fish have evolved. Strongly electric fish are defined as those  that  dis-
               charge their electri5c generating organs reactively to stun prey or  resist
               capture. Weakly electric fish are defined as those that  detect  and  classify
               objects by the object perturbing the electrical field formed by  the  electric

                                                                                            3
              generating organ which normally emits a continuous pattern of  pulses.  The-
              electric field so set up is not strong enough to stun other fish.
                    .There are numerous species of weakly electric freshwater fish but
              most can be classified as either gymnotids which are South American  in  origin
              or mormyrids which are common 2in Africa.  The two groups have many similarities
              and some differences in physical structure and in the function of  their  elec-
              trical field generating-organs and receptor organs.  Other  weakly  electric
              fish include Gymnarchus, an African fish, probably related to the mormyrids,
              and sternarchid, a South American fish that is probably related to the
              Gymnotids.
              Generator Organ
                     An 2understanding of the structure and function of the  electrical  field
              generator organ is of importance in understanding receptor  function.  Thus,
              generator function will be considered first.
                     The cells of the generating organ are referred to in  the  literature
              as electroplaques, electroplax, electroplates, or  electrocytes.  We  shall
              follow Bennett(1970) and use the term electrocytes.  The  electrocyt2es  are
              derived from the mesoderm (Szabo,,- 1966),the same type of embryonic  tissue
              as muscle except in the South American family Sternarchida.e.  The origin
              of the electrocytes of the sternarchids is the same embryonic  tissue  from
              which the neural system is derived, the ectoderm (Steinbach, 1970).
                     Electrocytes of mesodermql origin are typically disc shaped, but may
              also be dr2um shaped or tubular.  Electrocytes of ectodermal origin are U
              shaped processes from the spinpl cord. The electrocytes  of  the  gymnotid,
              Hypopomus, are between 300-500 p in diameter and about e'00 p thick.  The
              electrocytes of Sternopygus on the other hand are rod-shaped and much longp-r

                                                                                        4
                  than those of HypoDomus.  They are about 1-2 mm in the anterior poste
                                                                                         rior
                  direction and 200 p in diameter. These cells are  packed  together  tightly
                  with little extracellular space, whereas the electrocytes of Hypopomus.-are
         2         separated by a considerable amount of extracellular space.
                       The electrocytes are "stacked" in columns in the rear portion of the
                  fish's body to form the electric generating organ.  For example, the electric
                  organ of Gnathonemus, a mormyrid, is located just in front of the tail fin
                  and extends forward less than 1/5 of the fish's  body  length.  Gymnarchus'
                  electric generating organ ext2ends from the tail fin to nearly the midpoint.
                  The generating organs of the gymnotid Gymnotus, and of  Sternarchus  extend
                  further from the tail fin almost to the back of the head.
                        The weakly electric freshwater fish can be categorized in terms of
                  patterns of discha--ge: those with variable frequency and those with con-
                  stant frequency.  Constant frequency fish are defined as those that discharge
2                  their electric generating organs at a virtually constant rate even when
                  strongly stimulated by an experimenter.  Some of these ar e Eigenmannia,
                  Sternopygus, and the sternarchids.  These differences are not absolute, how-
                  ever, and there are species di-fferences in basic rate.  The generating organ
                  of the mormyrid Gnathonemus for example, is reported (Bennett, 1970) to dis-
                  2charge at frequencies of 30-100 pulses per second (pps).  Gymnarchus is re-
                  ported to discharge at a frequency of about 250 pps; Gymnotus has a frequency
                  rate of 40-60 pps; Eigenmannia emits pulses at a rate of 250-400 pps; Sterno-
                  pygus fires at 60-100 pps; Steatogenys emits pulses at 40-60 pps; and Hypo-
                  pomus at 2-20 pps (Hagiwara and Morita, 1963). 1  Sternarchi6ds discharge at
                  1.  Each type of fish has a waveform that is specific to itself.  Therefore,
                      although Gymnotus and Steatogenys have the same.frequencies, their wave-
                      ,orms.are different.  These differences in waveform may be functions of
                      the experimeritf-rs' comt)etence in engineering.

                                                                                          5
            rates of 600-2000 pulses per second (Erskine, Howe & Weed, 1966).  Fish  that
            are reported to emit at variable frequency generally increase their discharge
            rate markedly when stimulated. Fish that exhibit this  characteristic  are
            the mormyrids (Mandriota, et al, 1965), Hypopomus, Steatogenys, and  Gymnotus
            (Larimer and McDonald, 1968). It should be noted that  constant  frequency
            fish do vary their frequency under certain circumstances.  These circumstances
            include the presence of another signal with frequency close to the  fishes'.
            For example, Eige=annia which has an organ discharge rate of 400  pps  shifts
            its frequency 10 to 20 pps when confronted with a 400 pps signal (Larimer  &
            McDonald, 1968). In this co2ntext, also, is the observation  that  Gymnarchus
            temporarily ceases its discharge entirely when presented with a signal mimick-
            ing another Gymnarchus or when startled (Bennett,1970).2
                 The mechanisms for controlling electric organ output are in  the  med-
            ullary portion of the brain and appear to be similar among weakly  electric
            fish. A small group of cells in the medulla are autoactive and  fire  syn-
            c2hronously, apparently acting as a pacemaker. Their discharge  appears  to
            trigger another group of cells in the medulla commonly referred to as  med-
            ullary firelays". Axons from the medullary relay cells descend as part  of
            the spinal cord to synapse on spinal relay neurons. These in  turn  communi-
            cate the signal to the electrocytes. The electrocytes of the  electric  gen-
            erating organ fire synchronously because 2of one or more compensatory  mechan-
            isms in the relay pathway from the pacemaker cells. One mechanism  is  vari-
            ation in length of the pathway to the electrocytes. The axons to  the  more
            distant electrocy-tes extend in the straightest possible line but those to
            the less distant electrocytes follow a circuitous pattern. A  second  means
            of maintaining synchronization involve a delay line mechanism whereby  the
            pathways 4to the electrocytes differ in conduction velocities.
            2. If a passive electric sense is more common than is thought,  this  could
               be a protective reaction.

                      A number of investigators have measured the voltage output of the
                  generating organ. Hypopomus is reported to generate a voltage of 8 volts
                  peak to peak when electrodes are placed on the head and tail with the fish
                  more or less out of the water.  The same fish in water is reported to generate
                  a voltage of from 10 to 200 millivolts.  The in-water measurements were taken
                  with two stai2nless steel electrodes, one placed in front of the fish and one
                  placed behind the fish.  The distance between the electrodes was not given
                  nor was the distance between the electrodes and the fish given. In  general,
                  we find that inadequate information is given in the reports of voltage
                  measurements of the electric organ output.
                       Based upon the inadequate information that is reported on voltage
            2      measurements and upon measurements that we have made in water, we would
                  ,suggest ignoring the measurements reported in the literature.  In measure-
                  ments in our laboratory simulating the reported data, we found the" the
                  water acts as a very high distributive resistance. When an  oscilloscope
                  is used in the typically reported fashion to measure the fishes' voltage
                  output the input impedence of the scope is bein2g placed in parallel with the
                  resistance of the water.  Even when a high input iinpedence scope is used,
                  there is a loading effect upon the circuit.  Thus, we believe, based upon
                  our measurements and the reported investigations, that the investigators
                  have been inadvertently loading down the fish's electric field generator
                  through the use of their measuring devices.
                       We can summarize th9e salient points by saying that these fish generate
                  a pulsed electrical field in the water. The generator is located in  the
                  posterior portion of the body. The generator components have  their  outputs
                  synchronized by a clock.  In some species the clock is more or less invarient,
                  in others it varies, in part, as a function of external events.  The  reason

                                                                                        7
               for this difference among species is unknown.  The voltage output of the
               generator and the effective range of the field are unknown due to inadequate
               measurement technique.
               Receptor Organ
                    The weakly electric freshwater fish are reported to have both  active
               and passive sensory systems2. The active system primarily detects  disturb-
               ances in the fish generated E field.  The passive system is primarily sensi-
               tive to energy provided by extrinsic sources. We are not so sure that  the
               data replly indicates two such systems in the same fish, but we shall follow
               the convention for the time being. There is better evidence that there  are
               a number of fish, such as sharks and gold fish, that have good pass2ive
               electrosensing systems but no active system. These latter fish and  passive
               systems are not considered, as such, in this paper.
                    Gymnotid receptors.  There are two basic types of electroreceptor
               organs reported in the literature.  The differences may be more apparent than
               real in terms of function.
                    The ampullary organs are believed to be the passive system sensors.
               They consist of2 cells that maintain a continuous rhythmic background firing
               (low rate spontaneous impulses from the receptor to the brain). Thus,  they
               are referred to as tonic receptors.  This background firing appears to be
               unrelated to electric organ discharge.
                    The ba@kground firing shifts smoothly to a higher or lower rate in
               response to the electricsl sources moving into the fish's range.  The response
               to a brief7 stimulus, for example, is acceleration followed by deceleration.
               The acceleration phase can outlast the stimulus and according to Bennett
               (1970) @here is accomodation to maintained stimuli.  These receptors are
               sensitive to low freauency electrical fields and to changes in a DC field.

                                                                                         8
                     Their response to an applied current is a monotonic increase.
                          The active system sensors are called tuberous organs.  They are more
                     rapidly adapting than tonic receptors. They are sensitive to relatively
                     high frequency stimuli and are insensitive to applied DC.  Their firing is
                     related to electric orga2n discharge in that they respond with a train of
                     pulses to each electric organ discharge.  Thus, they are referred to as
                     phasic receptors@
                          As seen on the skin, the ampullary and tuberous organs differ.  They
                     also differ in appearance from mechanoreceptors, i.e., canql organs and
                     free neuromasts.  The tuberous organ appears on the skin surface as a
                     single small2 pore, even though it has no opening.   The ampullary organs
                     appear as a group of small pores.  As an indication of the number of recept-
                     ors found on a fish, it can be noted that Lissmann and Mullinger (1968) found
                     that there were 2,000 ampullary and tuberous organs on a 6 cm. long Steato-
                     genys.  Most receptors, about 95 percent, are phasic receptors according to
                     Lissm2ann and Mullinger (1968).
                           In considering the fine structure of the receptor organs, it can be
                     noted that the ampullary organ has the appearance of a flask with a narrow
                     duct (5-20 p in diameter) leading from the skin surface to a cavity (30-
                     40 p in diameter) that is located 100-500 v within the skin.  Embedded in
                     the cavity wall with only a small 2surface exposed are the sensing cells of
                     the organ.  These sensing cells are 10-15 p in diameter with each organ
                     containing two to eight of them.  Some microvilli 0.8 p long are irregularly
                     distributed on the exposed surface of the sensing cells.  Filling the duct
                     and cavity is a jelly-like substance with no known function.  All sense cells
                     in one organ feed their s3ignals to the same myelinated nerve fiber.  The nerve
                     is unmyelinated within the organ, having lost its myelin sheath and dividing
                     before entering t@if, orr,,iri.

                                                    DUCT  WALLS
                                                    MICROVILLI
                                                    RECEPTOR C L
                                                    SUPPORTING CEL
                                                 -NERVE   FIBER
                                                         LOOSE EPITHELIAL CELLS
                                                          OVERING CELLS
            2                                              ELLULAR LAYER OF CAPSULE
                                                          RECT:PTOR crLL.
                                                          NFR,VL TERMINAL
                                                           UPPORTING  CELL
                                                          NERVE FIBER
                                               -SVJN SURFACE
                                          2          ELLY SPHERE
                                                    RECEPTOR CELL
                                                    MUCOUS SUBSTANCE
                                                    FACEPTOR  CELL
                                                    ASEMENT MEMBRANE
                                                    SUBSENSORY PLATFORM
                                                    NERVE
                            2                                -RECEPTOR  CELL
                                                              SUSSENSORY PLATFORM
                                                              BASEMETJT MEMBRANE
                                                            -NERVE
                          Fig.1 a) Schematic drawing of the two types of ampulla of gy=o-
                          tids, b) Schematic drawing of the tuberous organ of the gymnotid,
         7                 c) Schematic drawing of the mormyromast of the mormyrid, d) Sche-
                          matic drawing of the tuberous organ of the mormyrid.

                                                                                                9
                          There are a great many clusters of five to fifteen ampullary  receptor
                    cells on the head. On the body there are fewer clusters and they  tend  to
                    be restricted to 3 bands that extend longitudinally along the fish.3
                          The tuberous organ consists of a bulb shaped invagination of the  skin
                    as sh2own in Fig. lb. The side of the bulb is composed of 10 to  50  layers
                    of flattened cells for a,total thickness of 2-5 -p. The bottom of the  bulb
                    is made up of supporting cells upon which the numerous sensing cells  rest.
                    The sensing cells are 25-30 P long and project somewhat like rods into  the
                    cavity of the bulb.  They are ordered such that the gap between adjacent
                    sen2sory cells is relatively constant. Each sensory cell is covered  on  the
                    cavity end with microvilli 0.7 P long. The cavity is filled with  a  fluid
                    or possibly jelly-like substance. Loose epithelial-like cells fill  much  of
                    the cavity above the sensory cells and appear to plug the pore to the surface.
                    The sensory eel-Is feed their signals to a single nerve which, in most cases,
                    loses its myelin2 sheath where it passes into the tuberous organ.  In a smpll
                    proportion of the tuberous organs the myelin sheath is'retained until  the
                    nerve fiber enters the sensory cell. The tuberous organs are  randomly  dis-
                    tributed on the head, where,,they are most numerous, and on the anterior half
                    of the body.  On the posterior half of the body the tuberous organs are found-
                    in four lo2ngitudinal bands.
                          Mormyrid recedtors. In Mormyrids, the electroreceptors are  referred
                    to as mormyromasts and Knollenorgans (Szabo, 1967). The mormyromast  is  a
                    two level organ that c6ntains at the surface level sensory cells (type  A)
                    similar to the ampullary sensory cells and at the second level sensory cells
                    (type B) similar to the sensory cell8s of the tuberous organ of the gymnotids.
                    Types A and B sensory cells are always separately innervated.
                    3.  The fish being described is Hypopomus artedi, a species of gymnotid.
                        Details vary slightly from species to species.

                                                                                   10
                    The type A sensory cells forn one or two concentric aureoles at the
               base of a "Jelly sphere" located near the surface of the skin as shown in
               Fig. lc.  In the center of this aureole, a small duct leads to a more deeply
               situated sensory chamber in the skin within which the type B cells are
               located.  The inner surface2 of the duct wall bears tiny microvilii.  The
               duct as well as the lower sensory chamber is  filled with a-.=-,cous substance.
                    Two to five sensory cells occupy the lower sensory chamber.  The type
               B cells with their supporting cell platform though similar to the tuberous
               organ are smaller. They do not completely fill up the sensory chamber  and
               their free surfaces bear a large numb2er of microvilli.
                    The type B sensory cells in a mormyromast are innervated by a  single
               nerve fiber which splits immediately after penetration through the supporting
               cel-Is into several branches to serve the sensory cells. Where the nerve joins
               the type B sensory cell membrane a rod like projection, 0.5 p in size, occurs
               within the sensory cell.
                    Each type A sensory cel2l is encircled by several accessory cells.  The
               sensory cells and their accessory cells are bottle-shaped. The  apical  or
               tip portion of both sensory and accessory cells contact the jelly  sphere.
               The nerve fibers innervating type A cells lose their myelin sheath  before
               entering the receptor organ and pass among the accessory cells to  contact
               the sensory cells.  As with type B cells, where the nerve joins the sensory
   2            cell, there is a rod present at the sensory cell membrane.
                     The mormyrids also have receptor organs, knollenorgans, which are some-
               what similar to the tuberous organs of the gymnotids.  Derbin and Szabo (1968)
               describe them as being composed of three or four sensory cell complexes one
               of which is shown in Fig. ld.  Each complex is a single sensory cell attached
               to a highly differentiated supporti7ng platform of cells.  The organ is inner-
               vated by single nerve fiber which is derived from a nerve that appears  to

                    serve many sensory cells.
                         The sensory cell lies in and almost completely fills a cavity in the
                    skin at the surface.  The wall of the cavity is formed by flattened-epithel-
                    ial cells.  The interior epithelial cells have microvilli-like processes
                    which densely pack the space about the sensory cell. The cavity has a rela-
                    tively large opening toward the support2ing cells through which the sensory
                    cell cont-acts the-nerve endings and supporting cells.  The sensory cell itself
                    35-40 ii in diameter.
                         In sum then, the weakly electric fishes of South America, the gymnotids
                    and of Africa, the mormyrids  both seem to have receptor organs that are
                    similar in some respects but differ in other respects.  Though there are
                    structu2ral differences in receptor organs within and between species, the
                    evidence suggesting that there are differences in function is rather weak.
                    We shall now consider this matter of the receptor organ and system funct-@-(-)Li.
                    System Function, Measurement Technique,and Sensitivity.
                          This section will of necessity be short since the-ze,is relatively little
                    da2ta which is acceptable from bo'.h a biological and engineering standpoint.
                    I'hus, we will discuss the three primary techniques %ha+. have been used to
                    obtain data on function, discuss their deficiencies, and estimate from the
                    data the probable system functior- and sensitivity. Two of the techniques are
                    electrophysiological ard the third is behavioral.
                          Electrophysi2ological and behavioral techniques, In one electrophysio-
                    logical techniciie the fish is anesthesized and fixed to a wooden plate in
                    the normal swimming position.  The wocden plate is then tilted into the water
                    so that the body is submerged and the head exposed to the air.  The regular
                    respirat(=y movemerits and oxygenat'@on are maintained by spi-aying a fine jet
                    of wat0er into the mouth of the fish.  The dorsal branch of the lateral line

                                                                                             12
               nerve which lies i=nediately under the dorsal skin at the head, is then  -
               surgically exposed.  After desheathing it, fine nerve strands are separated
               by microdisection.  Then silver-silver chloride electrodes are applied to a
               strand and single nerve fiber responses are recorded under various stimula-
               tion conditions2.
                    The other electrophysiological technique involves restricting  the  fish's
               movement by placing it in 3 to 5 inches ofwater in a small glass or plastic
               tank.  Electric discharges are then detected with monitoring equipment connect-
               ed to the water via electrodes suspended in the experimental tanks.
                    The data obtained by the above provide insight into system  operation  but
               are not very useful in eval2uating the function or sensitivity of  receptors  or
               systems.  First, in those cases where anesthesia was used, a question can be
               raised on the effect of the anesthesia on neural function.  Second) the investi-
               gators were looking only at the isolated sensor signal under  grossly  abnormal
               stimulation conditions.  Third, the isolated sensor data, even if collected under
               reasonably normal stimulation conditions reveal little abo2ut  system  function.
               Fourth, the engineering is typically questionable for one reason or another.
               This fourth reason is also the prime problem with the yet to be  described  be-
               havioral technique. For example, Agalides (1965) did extensive  work  on  these
               fish, much of it being excellent. However, he used a  small  tank  which  would
               distort the fishes' field, he did not control impedence within  normal  limits,
2               & he had extraneous objects in the fishes' field.  Clark,  Granath,  Mincoff  &
               Sachs (1967) used stainless-@teel electrodes which distorted the fishes' field.
               Hagiwara, Szabo, Enger & Suga (1965, 1967) all show waveforms in their reports
               which appear to be riding on an increasing DC potential.  It appears as though
               their electrodes underwent a significaiit polarization during  the  experimen1t.
               The experimentors will not offer an explanation for *,his observation. Mandri-
               otals investigations (1965) are characterized by verf poor experimental techniques.

                 Not only did he use silver electrodes, a small tank, etc, but he used as a
                 punishment with his behavioral training technique an electrical shock sufficient
                 to visibly jerk the fish;  shock while studying the function of ele--trosensing
                 fish.
                     The foregoing is sufficient indication of the deficiencies encountered.
                 We shall turn now to the behavioral technique that has been used, the te2chnique
                 that can most directly answer the question of sensitivity.  In this technique,
                 the free swimming fish is conditioned to respond to a certain stimulus.  When
                 it responds correctly it is rewarded.  The stimuli used have been an applied
                 voltage gradient across the fish's tank or objects of different conductivity
                 hidden within clay pots.  With this technique, the sensitivity and function of
                 the entire 2system can be tested.
                      The lim-,Lts of sensitivity found can best be simtned up by stating that
                 the fish could detect the presence of a glass rod 2 millimeters in diameter in
                 a clay pot but would fail to respond to a glass rod of 0.8 millimeters in dia-
                 meter in the pot (Lissmann, 1958).  This limited statement of sensitivity is as
                 mu2ch as the state of the art provides.  And even this statement can be question-
                 ed since the tank used does not meet the specifications derived below.
                       Somewhat akin to this behavioral technique have been a limited number
                 of data gathering expeditions into the fishes' natural environment.  The
                 published results are rather limited.  About the only thing that has been
                 found is that the fishes have about the same 2pulse repetition rate in natural
                 conditions as they do in the laboratory.  It has also been found that the
                 weakly electric fish are nocturnal creatures.  Other results can not be
                 accepted due to deficiencies in engineering.
                       In sum then, we can conclude very little about sensitivity and system
                 function from the available biological data.  About all that can be said is
                 that the fish is repor1ted to be quite sensitive and qualitative observations

                                                                                     14
                would seem to bear this out.  But for reasons indicated above, there is no
                adequate quantitative data.
                     Size of tank required for valid experimental data. One of the prime
                deficiencies in the reported work-is the use of a tank of inadequate size or
                with extraneous objects in the field.  These distort the field and seriously
 2               effect the data obtained.
                     We have experimentally explored the effect of various objects and tank
                size on a simulated fish field and found that all objects and even the walls
                of small pools distort the field to some extent.  A quantification of this
                effect is defined in the calculations presented below in which we determine
                the specification of the tank needed for acceptable experimental work.
       2              We assume that the fish is located centrally within a cylinder.  With
                this assumption, we study how the potential varies as a function of cylinder
                length assuming an infinite radius for the cylinder.  Next, we assume the
                cylinder has infinite length and see how current varies with radius.  With
                this information, we will be able to determine reasonable lengths, widths,
                and depths for experimental containers2 for electric,fish research.  We will
                disregard all interfaces in this'-development because our ultimate intention
                is to determine when these interfaces can be disregarded.
                      The equations which express potential as a function of distance areh
                              L                                               L
                      for y > -:@ + a             v                        L
                    2                                   4 ir c          y   2   (y + L2
                -4. The five unnumbered equations used in this section are developed in a later
                    section.  They axe numbered in the later section as 27a, 27b, 27c, 48,51,
                    but a-opear in this order here.  Definitions of symbols can be found in the
                    appendix.

                                                                                          5
                        for L   a > y >    L  + a      V
                                                             4 7r c                  + y
                                                                         2        2
                                                                                  L
                               L                                 2                L
                        for        a > y               V
                                                             4 n e       L   y   (2L + y
                                                                         2
                   Plotting for different values of L in Fig. 2a we obtain the required cylinder
                   length.  Only the positive direction is plotted because the negative direction
                   is identical except the 2sign is reversed.  How long the cylindrical tank should
                                                 I
                   be is difficult to determine precisely.  As a minimii?n though we can say that
                   there should be 5 electric organ lengths of water in front and in back of the
                   fish at all times during the experiment.
                         To determine the cylinder radius required for the tank w, we can modify
                   the limi2ts on the integral expressing the current I in equation 48 of our
                   later development.  This equation is
                               co   2 7r             Q L   R
                                                     2    2      3/2          d     d R
                                            4 1T E  R + L
                               0     0
                   The only limit which needs to be modified is the infinity symbol. We
                   replace2 this with w and solving as before we find the current to be
                                                               w
                              Q L a
                         I                   2    2    1/2
                              2 c           R +  L             0
                   Equation 1 may be expressed in closed form as

                                                      L/a
                                                    or   %@,'Z"
                                                      V12
                                                        i.2
                                                        "I
                                                        0.9
                                                        0.8
             2                                           0.7
                                                        0.0
                                                        0.5
                                                        0.4
                                                        0.3
                                                        Q  2
                                                               L     3 L    5 L   7 L    9L     [2IL   13L
                                                                           ORGAN   LENGTH
                                                        100
                                                        to
                                                 z
                                                 i-I    so
                                                 cc
                                                        70
                                        2                60
                                                        50
                                                 x
                                                 c      40
                                                        30
                                                 0
                                                        20
                                                 I--
                                                 z
               2                                         10
                                                 de        0
                                                               L       3L      5L        7L      9L      liL     13L
                                                                              REOTARED WIDTH  AND  DEPTH
                                                                                     IN  ORGAN  LENGTHS
                       2            Fig.2 a) This illustrates the potential on the positive side of the
                                   dipole electric generating organ. The potential on the negative side
                                   is the negative reflection of this. b) This indicates the percent
                                   of maximum electric generator current which will flow between the posi-
                                   tive and negative ends of the organ as a fanction of the width and
         0                          depth of the tank, assuming a free field expression for the current
                                   generated.

                               Q L a         2                                                  (2)
                               2             L          w2 + L 2     1/2
                                         L
                     The maximum current is expressed in equation  51  of  the  later  development.
                     It is
                           I
                                 c
                     By letting      Ln     d 2solving equation 2 for different values of n, we
                                w   2-    Em
                     have obtained a plot of current as a function of width or depth.  This plot
                     is shown in Fig. 2b.  to obtain 90% of the maximum current requires 5 elec-
                     tric organ lengths on each side of the fish.  To  get  95%  would  require  10
                     lengths. More than 95% of the  maximum  current  would  be  almost  impossible
                     to obtain in the laboratory.
                           Thus for experimental tesults to be considered valid there should be
                     at least 5 electric organ lengths of water surrounding the fish.  For free
                     sw-itninirig experiments, it would be best to have at least 10 electric  organ
                     lengths about the fish.  When the fish must be restrained near the surface,1
                     10 organ lengths of water in all other directions should be the minimum.
                     It should also be noted that to simulate infinity in research, the tank
                     must be connected to earth ground and made to conduct.  This does not seem
                     to have been done in past research.

                                                                                          17
                          POSSIBLE RECEPTOR MECHANISM AND NEURAL CODING
                      The possible mechanism discussed below can not be said to be the  mech-
                anism that the fish actually uses in its detection and classification of objects.
                It is, however, derived from our review and analysis of the available data,
                from results of the limited expe2rimentation that we carried out to clarify
                some of the available data, and from our knowledge of auditory and labyrin-
                thine system function. The postulating of this mechanism, viewing  the  electro-
                receptors and auditory receptors as evolutionary derivations of the same  primi-
                tive receptor, provides a testable. hypothesis of receptor function. It  also
                provides a basis that can be of assistance in determining receptor 2 sensitivity.
                     Mechanism. The inner ear is a fluid filled cavity with a  complex  membrane
                structure.  It is notable for the complex electrical fields that are generated
                within it by external events and its organized bands of hair-like sensing cells.
                Ea.rly concepts of pressure waves in the fluid bending the hair cellsand thereby
                triggering signals to the brain are very much in question.  Some of the newer2
                concepts implicate an intermediate electrical field sensing mechanism in  the
                hair cells.  The precise nature of this is not clear but elements of O'Leary's
                (1970) recent experimentation and theorizing on the inner ear labyrinthine
                system appear to be quite applicable to the weakly electric fishes' sensing
                system. These elements combined with other information on auditory  and  balance
                sensor function8 will be discussed below to the extent that they have bearing  on
                our modeling of the fishes' sensing system.
                     Since Dohlman (1960) has shown that hair cell membranes  are  apparently
                impermeable to ions, O'Leary assumes that the detection of fields are due

                    to electrostatic forces as opposed to ionic current.  In his  analysis,  he
                    points up that dissipative energy loss of an electric field in  a  dielectric
                    is generally associated with movement of charge carriers.  These movements
                    in an electric field result in an effect called polarization.  Van Beek
                    (1967) has pointed out that the average molecular dipole moment P     in  a
           2                                                                           moi
                    heterogeneous system is the vector sum of induced  (electronic)  polarization
                    resulting from the relative displacement of electrons and  nuclei,  dipolar
                    polarization resulting from the partial alignment in the direction  of  the
                    field of molecules with permanent dipole moments. and  interfacial  (Maxwell-
                    2Wagner) polarization occurring at boundaries between the components of a
                    heterogeneous system.  Jackson (1962) has indicated that P     is related  to
                                                                              moi
                    the macroscopic polarization P (electric dipole moment per unit  volume)  and
                    the macroscopic electric field E by
                                P = N              X   E                 2                   (3)
                                                    e
                                where N is the number of molecules per unit volume
                                      x  is the electric susceptibility.
                                       e
                          From this and his own experimental data, O'Leary (1970) suggests
                    that a weak electric field in the fluid filled inner ear might be detected by
             2       hair cells by the polarization it induces in long-chain filaments of poly-
                    atomic molecules in the cilia.  Since Van Beer's (1967) studies of dielectric
                    behavior of colloidal solutiom indicate that particles such as polystyrene
                    spheres are frequently surrounded by electric double layers when  they  are
                    dispersed 'in dilute KC1 solutions, it is conceivable that low frequency5
                    electric fields polarize the molecules by inducing dipole moments in the

                                                                                             19
            double layers. There is also evidence along this line from  Heller,  et  al
            (1960) & Saito, et al (1966).. Polarization can also occur by  a  mechanism
            suggested by Frohlich's observation (1958) that large molecules can have
            CH 3) C=O, or OH groups that are in themselves dipolar, but have a net dipole
            moment of2 zero due to the vector sum of all the moments. These molecules
            then behave like nonpolar molecules in that their polarization are  of  the
            induced (electronic) type' with resonant-frequencies in the optical  range.
                 With these two possible polarization mechanisms,  O'Leary  develods  a
            theoretical basis for accepting,an electric field sensing mechanism.  This
            mechanism encompasses more data than a mechanical model.
              2   Starting with Ja:ckson's (1962) 6bservation that a charge e  which  is
            disdlaced a distance x is bounded by a restoring force F given by
                                 F     m w 2 x                                      (4)
                                          0
                        where m is the mass of the charge
                              w0 is the radian frequency of harmonic oscillation
            He1 goes on to consider the effect of a field on a charge.  The action of the
            field E causes the charge to be displaced a distance x from its equilibrium
            position.  From Newton's third law we know
                                eE = m w 2 x                                        (5)
                                        0

                      The induced dipole moment is then defined for one electron as
                                                         e2 E
                                             p      ex
                                             ind               2
                                                         m w
                                                            0
                      If there are Z electrons per molecule with f   of them bound by a restoring
2                                  2
                      force - m w    X, then the induced dipole moment is
                                                     e2  E     fA .-  E                    (T)
                                             pind    m          2
                                                               wJ.
                                 where Z = E fJ
                                           J
                            Temperature2 is not a variable in equation T so the induced polarization
                      would not be disrupted by thermal agitation,  Thus, the sensitivity of this
                      effect for the detection of weak E fields would be limited by quantum con-
                      siderations rather than by_the classical limit of kT.  These quantum limita-
                      tions are determined by the magnitude of the allowable shifts in energy levels
                      of the molecules caused 2by the field, considered as a small perturbation,
                      relative to the energy levels of the molecules in the absence of the field.
                            O'Leary suggests that this polarization mechanism has great sensitivity.
                      He estimates it for the inner ear with the following argument.  If the behav-
                      ioral threshold for stimul-usenergy is indeed close to lkT'-- 4 x 10-14 ergs/
                      molecule as suggested7 by devries (1949), the corresponding wave number 1/1
                      for an energy transition of  lkT

                                                                                      21
                                      hc/I   km                                       (8)
                 would be 1/;k 200 cm71 if this energy were entirely absorbed by a single
                 molecule. The threshold energy would probably be distributed  among  numerous
                 molecules.  Thus, the polarization of a single molecule would occur for
      2           energies much smaller than kT, i.e., for transitions of far less than
                 200 CM-1.
                      The occurrence of hyperfine splittings in the Stark  effect suggests
                 a transductive mechanism based on-polarization would be  sufficiently  sensi-
                 tive for the detection of threshold stimuli.  Herzberg (1950) and others
                 have studied spectroscopically the splitting of energy levels by an  electric
        2                                    Splittings of about   -3    1
                 field (the Stark effect).                      10   cm-  have  been  observed
                                                                                2     .3
                 from diatomic molecules with field strengths in the range of 10  -  10  v/cm.
                 Smaller "hyperfine" splittings were then predicted theoretically and observed
           2      using high resolution spectrometers.
                      Based upon the foregoing, transduction in the hair cell  can  be  viewed
                 as a quantum amplification process that is modulated by the average microscop-
                 ic polarization of an ensemble o--F' long-chain molecules associated with the
                 cilia.
                       This development suggests, accepting it for the electric  fish  sensor,
                 that the electric sensor would 3need protection from mechanical stimuli.  Both
                 mechanical and electrical stimuli might be detected by this molecular effect
                 in the electrical sensor because mechanical forces should also affect the
                 microscopic polarization of long-chain molecules.  The  bending  or  shearing
                 of cilia that contain long-chain molecules could result in a  change  in  the

                                                                                        22
                   net dipole moment and should also be detected by a transduction mechanism
                   that was sensitive to microscopic polarization.  The structure of the fishes'
                   receptor organs suggests that there is such protection.  This would be necess-
                   ary to minimize noise in the system.
                         If we are correct in suggesting 2that this is the type of receptor mech-
                   anism that is used by the fish for electrosensing, then it would provide a
                   basis for accepting the qua7-itative statements on the high sensitivity of the
                   fishes' electrosensors.  Lacking well controlled behavioral data on sensitivity,
                   we would hesitate though to conclude that the fish is as sensitive as this
                   analysis suggests.
                         We hav2e now considered the structure and function of the generator organ
                   and receptor organ.  Now we shall look at the next level of the nervous system.
                   We shall consider the coding of nerve impulses by the receptor Organ, its
                   transmission toward the brain, and the implications of the coding in under-
                   standing the electrosens--'ng function and sensitivity.
                        Coding. As has been noted earlier, the literature2-is encumbered with
                   multiple classification schemes for electroreceptors.  This has the potential
                   for confusion and does little to increase our understanding of receptor func-
                   tion.  For example, one scheme is based on external physical appearance, e.g.
                   small, medium and large mormyr(--)masts, another on total configuration,  e.g.
                   ampullary and tuberous, and there are other crude clas2sification schemes.
                        Two somewhat more useful schemes also exist.  One is used by almost
                   everyone who discusses electroreceptors.  In this scheme, the output of the
                   receptor is related to the output of the generating organ.  The electro-
                   receptors are said to be either phasic or tonic.  Phdsic receptors respond
                   (give an output) at some integer division of the generator frequency with
    2               a string of from one to ri pul,-,es.  Tonic -eceptors maintain a steady output

                                                                                        23
                that is essentially independent of generator output, changing as a function
                of an environmental stimulus.  Qualitative equations can be written for the
                output frequency of the phasic and tonic organs.  These are:
                                    NF generator         N =  1,2,3 ......
                          F       m                    2                                  (9)
                           phasic        n               n =  1,2,3 ......
                         F        F         +.  A f          (stimulus)                 (10)
                          tonic    resting      m v
                      There is a general relationship between  the  physical  classification
                scheme discussed in an earlier section and the tonic-phasic scheme just
   2             described.  Receptors fit for the most part into two classes - tonic recept-
                ors that are sensitive to low frequency stimuli and are of the ampullary
                type, and phasic receptors which are sensitive to high frequencies and are
                of the tuberous type.
                      The other useful classification scheme involves  the  apparent  coding
                employed by the electroreceptor for transmission of information to the brain.
  2                    One fish, Hypopomus, has electroreceptors which respond to each dis-
                charge of the electric organ with a succession of short pulses.  Each "pulse
                train" contains eight or more pulses (Hagiwara, Kusano,  &  Negishi,  1962).
                The electroreceptors of Gymnotus and Staetogenes respond with one to six
                pulses to each generator discharge (Hagiwara & Morita, 1962).  Some studies
            8    indicate that the number of pulses in each train can be related to the potential
                near the receptor.  This has been referred to as "number coding".

                                                                                          24
                          In another weakly electric fish, Eigermannia, each organ  discharge
                    does not produce a receptor output. If the fishes' electrical  field  is
                    distorted though, we find *.hat the receptor output is at most one impulse
                    per generator organ discharge.  If we decrease the distortion we find the
                    receptor o2utput to be one impulse per every two generator organ discharges
                    and so on.  In other w(:,rds the chance that a receptor will fire is related
                    to the stimulus intensity acting on it.  This type of coding is called
                    liprobability" coding.  (Hagivara & Morita, 1962),
                         Another fish, Sternopygus, was throughly studied by Bullock and
                    Chichibu (i965).  They found fi2bers that carry one impulse per organ dis-
                    charge.  They noted a phase or time relationship with the intensity of the
                    stimulus.  This is referred t6 as phase or latency coding.  They also found
                    other nerve fibers that maintained a rhythmical firing out of phase with
                    the electric organ discharge.  The frequency of these receptors changed as
                    a function of the intensity of the electric2 field near the receptor.  This
                    type of coding is frequency coding and is  characteristic of ampullary organs.
                         As a weak generalization, it appears that ampullary receptors  give
                    tonic responses with frequency coded information and tuberous receptors
                    give phasic responses with either number, phase, latency, probability or
                    frequency coded information.  But we can develop a stronger generalization.
       2                  Hag2Lwara and Morita (1962) suggest a model t'or probability coding
                    based on an assumed nerve threshold. By making certain  assumptions  about
                    the threshold curve, we-have extended their model to encompass all coding
                    schemes proposed to date.  Their model was originally developed for tuberous-
                    phasic receptors, but we can easily extend it to ampullary-tonic receptors4
                    with a si-mdle modification. We shall develop below this all encompassing
                    coding scheme since it suggests the nature of the system function.

                                                                                 25
                  The threshold model as reported by Hagiwara and Morita (1962) assumes
           that after a receptor fires, the 'threshold resets to some high value.  The
           threshold then begins to decay until the intensity at the receptor is equa4
           to or momentarily exceeds the threshold. At this point, the  receptor  fires,
           and the threshold resets.
2                  This will form the basic model on which we will elaborate in order to
           encom-Dass the different coding mechanisms. First, we will discuss some  gen-
           eral properties of biological threshold curves.  Then, we will define the
           relationships between the threshold curve and the electric organ output which
           are required by the available data.  Lastly, we will detail some of the meas-
           ures which could be made to quantify the threshol2d function.
                  It is established in biology that nerves can not fire during or instant-
           aneously after a previous firing.  There is also a biological basis for defin-
           ing the threshold curve as one describing an exponential decay from some
           value; Tmax the maximum threshold, to Tmin the minimum threshold.  In reality,
           the minimum value probably continues to decay with time. But  for  situations
           o2f repeated sampling, we can approximate it as Tmin , a constant value. Finally,
           it is probable that the threshold curve shifts as a function of the needs  of
           the fish.  Such shifts, if understood, could.be modeled by changing Tmin'
           Tmax   or the exponential time constant Tc
                  With these facts in mind, we can describe the threshold function for
           time after each firing as
                                            t
                  4    T =[TM.    T          T   + T .  + S (t)
                                  m          c     min

                    Further, as a very good approximation we could say
                                           t
                                       e   T  + T .  + S (t)                              (12)
                                   ma.x     c    min
                    The general shape of such a function is shown in Fig 3a.  To describe
                    probability coding, we must assume that 4 Tc     llf.  In such cases,
       2             the electric organ can discharge several times without firing the nerve.
                    The number of times it must discharge before activating the nerve is a
                    function of the stimillus potential relative to the threshold.  The higher
                    the potential the sooner the nerve will fire.  This is illustrated in Fig.3b.
                          We can also see that phasic coding requires Tmin > 0.  If Tmin were
                    zero, the 2sensor would reset independently of the electric organ and one
                    form of tonic coding would be observed.
                          To describe number coding we must assume that 4 Tc < < llf.  In  such
                    cases the electric organ will cause the receptor to fire more than once each
                    time it discharges.  The number of times the receptor will fire is proportion-
                    Al to the intensity at the receptor as illustrated in Fig. 3c.  Again,  for
                    phasic coding T .  must be greater than zero.
                                   min
                          As 4 T  becomes approximately the same as llf, several interesting
                                c
                    possibilities occur: phasic coding, latency coding, and interpulse interval
                    coding. Phase and latency coding are illustrated in Fig.4a.  They  are  one
                    and the same. Interpulse interval co2ding is illustrated in  Fig.4b.  It  is
                    also interesting that when 4 Tc is about two or three times 1/f a  combina-
                    tion of probability and number coding can be anticipated. Such  coding  has
                    been observed for Sternopygus (Hagi-wara and Morita, 1962).
                          It should be noted that this model does not account for the  observed
                    output of phasic receptors while the generator is be2tween pulses.  As has

                                                  T
                                            A
                                                    0
                                                  To,*
                                                       0           T,           aTe         3Tc         4Tc         t
                                                                TOIK ARTER PRIOR RECEPT2OR  OUTPUT IN
                                                                          TI PAC    CO#4$TA UTS
                                                    Too%             THITESHOL.D
                                                                                                    p     T
                                                                                                          p
                                     2                Twa
                                                                                                 L L i    u
                                                            HIGH        MEDIUM INTENSITY       LOW INTENSITY
                                                          INTENSITY
                                                       4L
                                                                                 TIMC
                                 2                                      THRESHOLD
                                                   Toes i
                                           c
                                                      TM                       T 't TIAL
                                                                                 AT
                                                                                 Ce'l ER
                                                   0        2                 MEDIUM          LOW              lum
                                                            HIGH
                                                                                                                 L
                                                                                  TIME
                            Fig.3 a) This is a mathematical description of the threshold of the receptor
                            to the intensity of the stimulating elec2trical potential as a function of
                            time following prior receptor output. b) This illustrates the relationship
                            between the electric potential at the receptor, the receptor threshold state,
                            and receptor output when the receptor threshold decay time constant is great-
                            er than the rep        etition rate of the electric generating organ. In this case
                            the apparent coding i6s commonly referred to as probability or frequency cod-
                            ing. c) This is comparable to case b, but the decay time constant is much
                            less than the duration of the electric organ output. In this case the out-
                            put of the electroreceptot is said to be pulse count coding.

                                                 TMRCSHOL
                                                                   POTENTIAL AT
                                Too&                                RECEPTOR
                             A
                                 I man
                                            NIGH             MIEDIUM           LOW
                                  u
                                    0
              2                                               TIME
                                                     POTENTIA&    AT ITCC PTO      HRESHOL
                                  To"
                              B
                                   0
                                  lot*
                                                 HIGH                    MEDIUM                   L(NW
                                     CO,2
                                                                  ,nmE
                              Fig.4 a) This illustrates the relationship between the electric
                              potential at the receptor, the receptor threshold state and receptor
                              output when the generator organ rate is just smaller than the recipro-
                              cal of the decay time constant. The output of the electroreceptor in
                              this case2 is typically referred to as phasic or latency coding. b)
                              This illustrates the relationship between the electric potential at
                              the receptor, the receptor threshold state, and receptor output when
                              the generator organ rate is just larger than the reciprocal of the
                              decay time constant. The output of the electroreceptor in this case
                              is typically referred to a0s interpulse interval coding.

                                                                                      27
              been noted previously, there are experimental reports that  phasic  -eceptors
              have an output apparently unrelated to generator output. We do  not  know  if
              this is due to this not being the best fit model, to our having  ihsufficient
              data to incorporate those Darticular observations into the model, the  exist-
              ance of a buffering 2capability at the receptor, or if the reports report arti-
              facts due to faulty technique.5 But whichever is the case, the utility  of
              the model is not affected. It can usefully be used as  a  unifying  framework
              for studies of threshold, sensitivity, and response time across all weakly
              electric fish.  With such a framework, sensitivity could be well defined
              experimentally and the mechanism of the sense better understood.
      2                   MODEL:  DEVELOPMENT, FUNCTION, AND SENSITIVITY
                    in outline, the fishes' sensing system appears to function as  follows:
              The generating organ emits an intermittent electric potential or  current.
              This results in an electric (dipole-like) field in the water surrounding
              the fish. Objects within the environment and also  the  environmental  bound-
              aries distort the electric field. This distort2ion causes a change  in  the
              electric field near the fish which we shall refer to as the stimillus.  The
              receptors measure the electric field or properties of it thereby providing
              information that is processed by the fish's nervous system.
                    This system model generally agrees with data reported by Lissmann
              (1963) from conditioned response  experiments.  In  his  experiments,  g7=ar-
              ch2us was trained to respond to changes in the conductivity of objects  placed
              in a sealed container. Positive reinforcement was a food  reward,  and  nega-
              tive reinforcement or punishment was the insertion of a metallic object  into
              the fish's tank. This punishment was probably not  sufficient  to  reasonably
              test the threshold of the biological system.  But by using this method
              Lissmann & Machin (1958) determined a threshold7 to potential charge of
              5. If Tmin were below the mechanical noise level, phasic receptors would appear
                 to be tonic receptors.

                                                                                         28
                   about 0.15 uvl'cm.
                         We sh%;Il also model the fish as a dipole, but a dipole that  differs
                   from the one suggested by investigators such as Lissmann.  He suggested that
                   the fish is a head to tail dipole. This suggestion,  however,  neither  fits
                   with the physical lo2cation of the electric generating organ  as  determined
                   anatomically nor with the function data reported by T@illock and Chichibu
                   (1965). As noted in an earlier section, the electric  generating  organ  has
                   been found to be located near the tail in most if not all  weakly  electric
                   fish. 1:@illock and Chichibu (1965) observed the zero potential plane to  be
                   perpend2icular to the fish and found it located approximately one  quarter  of
                   the way toward the head measuring from the tail toward the  head.  Thus,  we
                   use as our model a dipole field as illustrated in Fig. 5a.
                         We will develop a simplified model of the receptor and  then  discuss
                   system function. We will use the dipole concept described above  as  well  as
                   the hypothesis on sensor function derived 2from above.  Through  the  develop-
                   ment of a set of equations and a computer analysis, we will obtain an approxi-
                   mate solution for the response of the receptors due to  perturbations  caused
                   by an object in the field. Through this, we will  determine  critical  vari-
                   ables in the sense function and quantify their effect.  With  the  informa-
                   tion so derived, we will consider the practical implicati2ons of  the  sense.
                         The symbols used are defined in the appendix.  The definitions are
                   critical as is the recognition that coordinate transformations are necessary
                   and will be used.
                   Receptor Level
                         Development. Fig. 5b illustrates a simple dipole. It  consists  of  two
                   conducting spheres of radius a separated by a distance L.  One sphere is
                   positivel6y charged to a total charge of +Q.  The other sphere is

                                         0 Fi F-i :y :3,  til
                                         0   m     m @-4  m  04
                                         P, 0  0     0
                                             c+    c+ :y     %-n
                                             Ili   pi P.
                                         C+  P.
                                  2       0   0
                                         ul  04    Id
                                             (D    0 Fi
                                         0   :1    c+  @O (D
                                             m     m aN      P
                                             #i    tj    M   to
                                             P3    C+    0
                                         P2O  C+    H.-   &
                                         P.  P.              (D
                                         r,  04
                                             0     0         En
                                                         P.  (D
                                             04
                                                   @-i   @r  C+
                                         (D
                     2                              ct-   En  CI-
                                         q         O P.
                                         P   F3      P
                                         C+          Fi
                                         (1)         r_  P,  m                                              r
                                         P,        P, ED H-  FJ
                                             El      C+  0   m
 2                                        cl, 0     " "   0   0
                                         C-4 P,    P. P3 C-1- C+
                                             Fi    Fim   Pi  H.
                                                   P,m       0
                                             0           ol
                                         0   0       C+    C-4
                          2               o   0       :y      P.
                                             En    c+M   c+  M
                                         0   P.    M     ::$,P
                                         m   m          00m  13,
                                         ti  C+    tn0
                                         c+  En    P. pi P,  Fi-
                                         m         C+ r2p     ti
                                         01.t0     94 Fi     C+
                                         P,
                                         P.  C+    P, En 0   U)
                                         En  4     z m   "   P.
                                         C+  0     m Pi      ct
                                                             94
                                             Ell   C+ C+
                                         (I  'd    0 0       rA
                                         m   @y          P N
                                             m       0   0
                                                         0   Fi
                                                         w   0
                                             0     t-J.
                                                   In
             9                                        Fi      P,
                                                     m       04

                  negativ'ely charged to a total charge of -Q.  We will asstmre that a is much
                  less than L.  When this is the case, the charge on each sphere can be-assumed
                  to be evenly distributed about the surface.  The electric potential (voltage)
                  is defined to be the increment in work required to move an increment-of
                  charge from infinity to a given point in space, or
                                 a 2w
                            V                                                              (13)
                  Recall that the fundamental work equation states that work equals the kinetic
                  energy minus the gained potential energy or
                            W = K E - P  E                                                 (14)
                  If we move a very  small charge very very slowly along the line which passes
                  through the two  cha2rged spheres, the kinetic energy is essentially zero.  The
                  work is the negative  of the potential energy.  Potential energy is defined by
                  the integral
                                    y
                               A    f
                            P E       F  - dr
                                    x
                            whereF  is the force acting on the test charge as it is moved
                                    from x to y
             2                    dr is an increment of distance in the path between the
                                    points x and y
                  The electric force is a conservative force.  Thus, if a test charge is acted
                  on by more than one charge, we can determine the potential energy due to each
                  charge and find the total potential energy by addition.  In other words if
                  P E  represents the potential energy due to the nth charge, and if there are
      6              n

                                                                                     30
               a total of N charges the total potential energy is
                                        N
                          P E                P E                                     (16)
                             total              n
                                       n=l
                     The potential energy due to a charged sphere can be easily found.
               Th2e electric force may be found from Coulomb's Law which states
                                     q_t
                          F                      r
                                4 ir c r                                             (lT)
                         where  Q is the total charge on the sphere
                                cit is the charge of the test charge
                                r is the distance between the two charges
                            2    c is the dielectric of the media
                                ir is a vector directed away from the center of the charge
                                  on a straight line
                    Using Gauss's Law it can be shown that within the charged conducting
               sphere there is no electric force.  Thus, if the radius of the sphere is a,
               the force is
                         F     Irl <    lal     0                                    (18)
         1      If we call the line which passes through the two charges the y axis, we can
               find the potential energy at any point on the axis by solving equation 15.

                    We substitute the force from equation 1T and obtain
                                      ly
                                                  Q qt
                              p E                                 d r
                                                4 7i c r
                    The solution is
                                                                  ly + I
                              P E             '4t            2                  ly +1 > lal
                                           4 w c             r    Go
                    If we assign the dummy variable y- for the negative charge, we can solve
                    for the negatively charged sphere
                                         q
                                                                                            (21)
                         P E      +
                                    4 Tr el y -21
                    The potential energy for the posi-.;ively charged sphere is
                                        Q cit
                                                                                            (22)
                         P E +
                                     4 n
                    The total potential energy for the dipole system is
                         P E            Q qt          1        1                            5(23)
                             total    4 ir c .      ly-       Fy-+
                    If we define a coordinate system as shown in Fig.6,we find that the abso,.ute
                    values of y- and y+ depend on our location on the y axis as follows:

                                              CONDUCTOR
                                              RADIUS G
                                   ab
                                                                                 y
                                                                  L
                                                                + 12
                                   /2
                 Fig.6  Simplified model2 which will be used in the study of the electro-
                 static characteristics of the electric field generated by the fish.
                 The field generating organ is assumed to be composed of two conducting
                 spheres of radius a separated by a distance L.  For convenience, the
                 origin is taken to be the midpoint between the two conducting spheres.

                                                                                                    32
                          for y > L                           L
                                   2          ly+l  =  y  -                                          "24a@
                                                              2
                                                              L
                                              ly-I  =  y   +  2                                       (24b)
                         for L > y >       L I Y+ I  =    L
                              2            2              2 -'y                                      (24c)
                                               ly-I   =   L +y                                       (24d)
                                                          2
                         for     L  > y
            2                     2             ly+l   =   L -Y                                       (24e)
                                                          2
                                               ly_l   =    L
                                                           2  'y                                   (24f
                         The total potential energy can be found from equation 23 and equations
                  24a to f in each reg2ion.  Recalling that the kinetic energy is zero and
                  applying equation 13 in terms of the test charge we get:
                                              Q qt        1
                                                                                                   (25)
                         V
                                             4 7r E   ly  -1      ly +1
                 This yields
                                          1   9            1
                        V      Q
                             4 Tr E     ly +1         I Y -1

              Substituting the appropriate values of y+ and y- we obtain:
                                                        Q                 L
              for y > L  + a                     V =                                   (27a)
                                                      4           y - L)(y + L)
                                                                      2        2
                                                                 2                 r
                                                                       2 y
              for L  a > y >    L + a            V      Q                             (27b)
                                                      4           L   Y) (L +  y
                                                                 (2       2
                                                                        L
             for   L   a > y                     v
    2                                                                                  (27c)
                   2                                  4           L   y   L +
                                                                (2      (2
                        where V is the absolute voltage (V       o),
                                is the charge on either conductor,
                              L is the distance between  the  conductors,
                    2          c is a constant known as the dielectric
                              y is a continuous variable representing an absolute
                                scale with o being located between the positive and
                                negative charge as indicated in  Fig.  6.
                   Equation 27b can now be employed to find the relative voltage between
             the two spheres.  This is the voltage which should be measured in the labor-
             atory.
   2               Tet us define v to be the relative voltage between two spheres.  We
             note that v is the value of the voltage at the positive sphere minus the
             value of the voltage at the negative sphere.  By substituting y    L a
                                                                               7
             into equation 27b, we find the voltage on the positive sphere  to  be
                  v         I      L - 2a
                           4 7r  c a (L-a)                                         8

                                                                                    34
              Substituting y       L + a  into equation 27b we find the voltage on the
                                   1)
              negative sphere to  be
                               Q          L + 2a
                    v (-) =                                                         (29)
                              4 7T  E   a (L - a)
           2   Solving for v we  find
                    v   v       v                                                   (30)
              or
                           Q       2      1   L
                    V                                                               (31)
                        4 1T c
              Whcn a/L is less than 1/10, equation 31 can be approximated within 5 percent
              by the relatio----ship
     2               V                   a                                            (32)
                         2 n c 6
               The capacitance of an object is defined as
                          Q
                     C = --q-                                                        (33)
                          where Q is the charge on one symetric part of the object
                                V is the voltage across the object,.
               Determin8ing the capacitance of the dipole from equation 31, it is fourd
               to be

                                                                                35
                                           a
                      Q                    L)                                    (34)
                  c  - = 2 n ea
                      v                  2a
            This may be approximated within 5 percent for a/L less than 1/10 as
                  C   2   c a   1 + a                                            (35)
                                    L
                  It is useful to determine the resistance of the dipole we have just
            consider     Since we have already evaluated the
                    ed                                       voltage between the charges,
            if we can find an expression for the current that flows between the two points,
            we can solve.for the resistance from Ohms Law.
                       v
                   R
            4                                                     (36)
                        where R is the resistance
                              v is the voltage
                              I is the current
                   Two equal and opposite charges create an electric field.  If we can
              solve for the magnitude and angle of the electric field E, we can determine
              the current density i from the relationship

                                                                               36
                     where J is the current density
                           a is the conductivity of the media.
                Once the current density is known, the current I can be found from the
          surface integral
                     I       J . ds                                            (38)
                          f
                     where the integral is over any closed s2urface
                          ds is an element of surface taken to have a unit vector
                             located normal to the surface.
                The electric field is a vector quantity.  Thus, the total field is the
          vector sum of the field due to the negative charge @- and the field due to
          the positive charge E+.  Symbolically we can write
                     E = E+  +   E-                                            (39)
2
                     where E is the total field
               Due to symmetry, the most convenient surface to use for our current
          integral is the plane which forms the perpendicular bisector of the line
          segment joining the two equal and opposite charges.  This plane is illus-
          trated in Fig. 7a.  The electric field due to the positive charge at any
          point p is defined by the equation
                     E+
                           4 -a c D2  6         D+                               (40)

                                                                      37
                     where D+ is the distance between the positive charge and the
                             point p
                           i  is a unit vector located in the direction of D+ away
                           D
                             -from the positive charge at p.
                 The electric field due to the negative charge at the same point p is
                               -Q
 2                                     1
                     E-                D                              (41)
                                 2
                          4 ir cD-
                     where D- is the distance from the negative charge
                          i is a unit vector at p directed by the D line away
                           D-
                              from the negative charge.
            The minus sign in equation 41 is du'e to th2e fact that unlike charges attract.
                 So long as the point p is on a plane which forms the perpendicular
            bisector of the line segment between the two charges, the distances D+ and
            D are equal.  They can be found from the equation
                                       1/2
                            2    L2
                 D   D     R +                                        (42)
                 We have defined the y axis to be the line which p4asses through the
            two charges.  We note that at the point p of Fig-7a, the electrical field
            due to either charge has both y and radial components.  Due to symite'.ry,how-
            ever, the radial components cancel each other and the net field in the plane
            is narallel to the y axis. @lso due to symetry,the y magnitude of the y
            COMDonents are ec.ual. Thus the total electric field is

                                          -2  Q
                         Etotal       4 Tr c  D2         sin 0  iy                                 (43)
                 We  note   that     a  because  they  are  opposite  angles.Sin   acan   be   determined
                  from Fig-7a by
                                               L/2
                         Sin   a   Sin 8                                                           (44)
                2                               D
                  Substituting equation 44 into equation 43
                                          -Q  L
                         E                                                                         (45)
                          total      4 ir c D  3    y
                  Substituting   equation 42 into equation 45, and equation 45 into equation 37
                  yields
                                          L
                2         j                2                                                        (46)
                               4 7r c       + L2]  3/2
                                              'i@
                         The surface of integr,.;tion is considered to be small ring segments in
                  the x-z plane about the y axis.  Fig.Th illustrates this concept.  We note
                  that  the  electric  field  is  perpendicular  to  5the  x-z  plane  which   makes   the
                  integral defined by equation 38 easy to evaluate.  A surface element 'for the
                  ring  shown  in  Fig.  7b  is
                         ds    R d    dR                                                           (47)

                                                En P- EA 10 C+ P, 'lj
                                                :1 (DPH- r- H-
                                                rL ci' @l -4 (D aq
                                                P. P) (D
                                                Po0Fl C+ :A
                                                0PPt H 1.40
                                                (D C,+ (D-P)
                                                CD 'd FJ C'+
                                                H. El) (D :31
                                                :i '-I C-+ :4 (D
                                                C+ C,+ Id00
                                                (D ::r (D C+ ID
                                                -,Q (DnC+ (D
                                                11 PI @r (D
                                                P(D C+0
                                                :3- C+
                                                C+ 04
                                                (D C.+
                                                C+ (D
        2                                        P. Fl- En (D H-
                                                (D
                                                (D LI) El)
                                                (D0(D P, Fi
                                                C+0"0m0                                  1 1
                                                @:r C,+ C,+ (1)
                                                2P0P0C+
                                                (D EA '-4 (DP
                                                :@ U)Pcil
                                                M0'd9C.+ (D
                                                P(D"0MEl)
                                                clt P, P. P,
                                                H. C+ @j0C+
                                                0a' 2::r rt
                                                :1 (D (D
                                                110 C+
                                                C.+ 1-Y C.+
                                                (D (D :3' (D
                                                0:3mmH
                                                P
                                                ::s0C+ (D              2                                                                       
rn
                                                0C.+                                                                     9L
                                                C+ Fl-
                                                3@o
                                                ct0
                                                @3'F014 En
                 2                               MM:3-
                                                En CD C4 P -                                                                                   
rn
                                                C,+0Id
                                                C+
                                                Fi :3, C,+
                                                P .0
             2                                   r) P,
                                                0:31"
                                                :+ P-
                                                En m +
                                                0@-j
                                                P,
                                                Fl- tn
                                                En
                                     1           ct C+ ta
                                                rD0tzj
                                                C++

                                                                     39
                    where ds is the surface element,
                         d 0 is an increment of angle 0 which is an angle about
                            the y axis.
                         dR is an increment in the distance vector R.
                Substitution of equations 47 and 46 into equation 38, and defining
           the surface integral, we obtain
                     co  2Tr
      2                f    f         L a R
                               4 7r E R2+.L2        d 0  dR         (48)
           Solving the inner integral yields
                    co
                            (4 L a R
                   f      c:.(R2 2     3/2    dR                    (49)
                        2      + L
                    0
           Equation 49 can be solved to yield
                                          co
          2          Q L       -1                                    (50)
                I            2   2   1/2
                    2 c     R +  L
           In closed form                -0
                    Q a
                                                                    (51)
                    c
               We have previously solved for the voltage between the charges in
           equation 32. Dividing the voltage v by the current I, equation7 51 yields

                                                                                          .4o
                 the resistance as defined by equation 36
                                        (1 - a/1)
                             v     2    c a
                       R                                                                     (52)
                 which reduces to
                                               1              a
                         2              R                 1-                                  (53)
                                            2 it a a          L
                       We may now use the derived information.  As a first approximation let
                 us assure that the radius of each charged sphere, a, is 1 cm and that the
                 length of the generator organ, L, is 10 cm.  The conductivity of fresh water
                             -3   -i  -1
        2         is about 10    0    m   .  The resistance  which  loads  the  generator  organ  is
                                   6                                                   -9
                 about 62,000 ohms   .  The dielectric of fresh water is 0.707 x 10         fd/m.
                 This means that the capacitance which loads the dipole is 40 pfd. This large
                 resistance and small  capacitance  indicate  that  only  a  small2  current  flows.
                 Thus, an electrostatic approach  to  the  electric  fish  problem  can  be  justi-
                 fied on electrical grounds as well as on the previously discussed theoretical
                 b4.ological grounds.
                       Function. Accepting now the electrostatic model, we will consider the
                 effect of an intruding object on an individual receptor.  As a simplification
                 the intruding object will bLi assum2ed to be a sphere.  Such an object moving
                 into the fish's field  will  modify  the  potentials  along  the  fish's  surface.
                 To obtain a solution  for  these  modifications,  we  will  first  consider  the
                 --lectric field produced by the dipole i-,cnerator or[,ari uridistiirbod by  the
                     Iii a practicil model, the resistance loadiiir of the f-,t,,,i(5,rator call be
                     coritrolled I)y the choice of (,en#-rat.or t-lecti-ode

                                                                                       41
                 perturbating object. We will calculate its magnitude at  an  arbitrary  point
                 p.  We will then consider the effect at point p of a perturbating object
                 located in a uniform field.  Then we will transform the perturbation portion
                 of our solution back to the original coordinate system.
                       Once we have obtained an appro2priate solution, we will assume  and  fix
                 certain variables. Then we will study the nature of  the  fishes  classifica-
                 tion techniques by plotting our results for given receptors along  the  fish.
                 It should be noted that this analysis is three dimensional and  although  not
                 conceptually difficult, it is somewhat complex.  Fig. 8a illustrates the
                 problem.
                       The electric field is defined a2s the force that would be exerted per
                 unit charge on a small test charge at a given point
                                                                                       (54)
                       E (p) = F (p) / q-t
                 The force on a test charge q+due to another charge Q can be found from
                 Coulomb's Law as
                               qt
                                                        2                               (55)
                              4     D2   D
                       where E is the dielectric of the media
                             D is the distance between the charges
                             ,A@
                              iDis a unit vector directed away from each charge at
                                the charge.
                 The electric field due to the positive charge in the dipole system is
                     8  E+                                                             156)
                            4 ir c  R2        R
                                 w

                      @3 0     P.
                   P,   PClt- U) 04
                      P  (D   Id
                      U) C't (D
                         (D
                   ct    (D
                   (D C), -4
                         (D Id
                            (D
                   En    P  "
                            It
                      LI)0  CT,
       2                  0  H-
                               Ct
                         P,  @rq 11
                         P.    P3                (4
                            0  C+
                            &  (D
                      ct rt. c@. En
                   PL P        C+
                      clt L* clt :31
                      (D
                      En
              2           C+ In .4
                      C+ (D    P
                      (D U) I  H-
                            (D P
                         c+ EA 0,
                         ::J' (D
                      0  C+ C+ En
                      (+
                      0  r  :3 @:s
                         C+ C+ 0
                      11 Cy, (D
                      m  eD    m
                            0
                      P. 0
                               0
                         P.    r_
                      C+ (D    I
                      0  1  m
                         (D tl E3
                      m  P, .4 0
                      x
                      1  :3 0
                      (D
                      En c+
                      En
                            C+

                                                                                          42
                The electric field due to the negative charge is
                      -.).-        -Q
                      E -  =                     i
                              4 -n c  R'2         R'                                   (57)
                                   w
                The electric field is a vector quantity. Thus, we  must2  perform  vector
                addition in order to determine the total field E. It is  easier  to  determine
                the components of the-field due to each charge and then to add the components.
                Thus, we will concern ourselves first with the y component and then  with  the
                x-z component.
                      The y component of the electric field due to the positive charge is
                      EY+ = IE,l COS 0                     2                            (58)
                L4@kewise the y component of the electric field due to the negative charge  is
                      E  = I'E-1 COS 0-                                                (59)
                       y
                      The x-z components of the electric fields are.independent of  the  angle
                although the actual x and z components are not.  The x-z component of the
3                total electric field will be considered to be the component  within  the
                x-z plane at an angle 0 from the axis.  For the positive charge it is
                      EX-Z  = JE.1  Sin 0                                              (6o)
                and for the negative charge it is
                      E      I'E-1 Sin 0-                                              (61)
                       X-Z

                                                                                                        43
                            In order to treat these variables by standard mathematical techni-ques,
                     it is necessary to express  R'  in  terms  of  R  and  0,  and  OA  in  terms  of  R
                     and 0.  Fig.8b illustrates the factors which will help us do this. Recog-
                     nizing that R' is th2e hypotenuse of a right triangle whose sides are R sin
                     0 and L + R cos 0, we find
                                                                 1/2
                                       2     2
                               R.'    R  + L  + 2 R L Cos 01                                       (62)
                     and
                                              R Sin 0
                            OA  =  tan                       2                                      (63)
                                              L + R Cos- 0
                     It is useful to note the trigonometric functions for OA. They are
                                             R Sin 0
                            Sin  OA  =[R 2 +  L2 + 2 R L Cos 0       1/2                           (64)
                     and
                                            L + R Cos-0
                2            Cos  OA  =     2    2                    1/2                           (65)
                                       [R  + L  + 2 R L Cos 0    1
                     Combining equations 62, 64, and 65 with equations 56 and 57 and substituting
                     into equations 58, 59, 60 and 67 yields
                                     Q -'Os  0
                            E                                                                      (66)
                             Y+     4 7r c  R2
                                           v
                                             -Q L + R Cos 0
                            Ey-                  2     2                    3/2                    (67)
                                     4          R  + L  + 2 R L Cos 0
                                           w

                                                                                44
                          Q Sin 0
                 E    +                                                          (68)
                  X-Z     4     R2
                              w
                                            -Q R Sin 0                           (69)
                 EX-Z                 2    2                  3/2
                            2.4 it ew [R  + L  + 2 R L Cos 0
                 We can now determine the total components of the electric field.  The
           y component of the electric field at any point R, 0 about the di-pole is
           independent of 0 and is
                                  Cos 0            L + R Cos 0
                 Ey                  2        2    2                  3/2        (70)
                       4    c       R        R  + L + 2 R L C2os E)
                            w
           The component of the electric field in the x-z plane is radial and independent
            of 0.  It is
                                                             R
                  E         Q Sin 0     1
                   X-Z    4 -ff c       R5' - [R 2 + L2 + 2 R L Cos 0   3/2       (71)
                               w
                  To continue our derivation, we mu4st deterfaine the magnitade l@l and
            the angle (relative to the y axis) 0 of the electric field at any point in
            space.  The magnitl-tde may be found from the rules of vector addition as
                            2       2  1/2
                          Ey  + EX-Z                                              (72)

                                                                                                45
                  The angle found by studying the geometry of the situation is
                                         E
                                         X-Z
                         a = tan                                                                (73)
                                         Ey
                  Manipulating the  expressions  in  equations  70  and  721  per  equation  72  yields
                                                          2
                                                      2 R  (R + L Cos 0)                        (74)
                  E                                                                 +
                        4    c  R2                R2  + L 22 R L Cos 0     3/2
                              w
                                                                                    2               1/2
                                                                                R 4
                                                                 [R2 + L2 + 2 R L Cos 0      2
                                                                               3/ 2
                             tan -1    Sin E)     [R2  +  L2+ 2 R L Cos 01              -R 3
                                                                    3/
        2                                [R2+ L 2 + 2 R L Cos 01       2   Cos 0 - R 2 + L + R 3 Cos 0
                                                                                                (75)
                  7'hese  rather  complicated  equations  completely  describe  the  electric   field
                  due to the dipole in a continuous media of dielectric c..
                        To obtain  a  first  approximation  of  the  perturbation  due  to 2 a  sphere
                  of radius r at a location R         0 , relative to the dipole coordinates,
                                                0       0
                  we assume that the sphere  i.s  located  within  a  uniform  field  of  strength  E0
                  at an angle a relative to  a  line  parallel  to  the  y  dipole  axis  through  the
                  sphere center. We  will  further  assume  that  the  value  of  this  field  is  the
                  v0alue of the dipole field at the center of the sphere, disre@.-arLI.ing the effect
                  of the sphere. If  the  sphere  is  small  relative  to  the  dipole  length  or  if
                  it is very small relative to the separation between the dipole and the sphere,

                                                                                  46
             *,he assumption will permit a solution within acceptable limits.  The equations
             which describe the electric field due to the dipole could be simplified to
             a good approximation if the separation between the dipole and the object
             sphere is more than ten dipole lengths.  Since the biological data is not
             adequate, we do not know the range of the electric s2ense.  Consequently, we
             will not approximate the field at this point.
                  Assuming a uniform field (without the perturbation) and expressing
             the potential in terms of the coordinate system centered at the object
             we obtain
                  U   -E0 P Cos a                                                 (76)
             The surface charge on the perturbating sphere is exactly like a dipole. Thus,
             the potential is of the form
2
                         A Cos a
                  U  =                                                            (77)
                   x        2
                           p
                       where A is a constant to-be determined from the boundary conditions.
             Finally the potential inside the sphere is of the same form as the potential
             due to the original field or
                   uL     B p Cos  a                                       6       (78)
                        where B is a constant to be determined from the boundary conditions,
             The potential outside the sphere is the sum of U0 and Ux or

                                                                                                     47
                               Utota.,      E  p Cos a       A Cos a                                (79)
                                               0              p
                   The electrostatic boundary conditions require that when p             r
                                 a u                   a ui
                            c         tot2al      c                                                  (8o)
                             w        p          x         p
                   and that  when  p  =  r
                          utotal    u I                                                             (8i)
                   Substituting equations 78 and 79 into equatic-l-
                               3           3
                          E  r     A = B r                 2                                         (82)
                           0
                   Substituting equations 78 and 79 into equation 60 yields
                          c  E  +  2  A  c  =  r3c  B                                               (83)
                           w   0         w        x
                   We can solve for A on B in equation 82 and 83 to find
                                   3  c
                                    2  w
                          B                                                                         (84)
                                 c  +  2  E      0
                                  x       w
                   -ind
                                 c
                                  x      w     3
                          A                  r    E                                                 (85)
                               c  +  2   E        0
                                 x       w

                                                                                           48
               The potential U  0 was assumed to be the potential due to the dipole field.
        We have an accurate expression for this field.  The potential within the sphere
        does not effect the potential near the dipole.  The critical term is the potent-
        ial U  xwhich is the  approximate  modification  of  the  dipole  field  due  to  the
        spherical object.  Substituting equ2ation 85 into equation 77 yields
                      C    C              .3
                      x     w           r
               U                       -      JE I  Cos a                                (86)
                x                         2      0
                      cx   2 cw         p
        the perturbation potential.
               We recall  the  value  of  E0to be the value of equation 74 when R        Ro and
        2when 0 =  00  or
                                       2  R 2 (R  - L Cos 00)
                                          0      0                         +             (87)
        E0              2-     1        2     2        2           3/
               4   c   R               R  +  L   +2   R  Cos Oj       2
                    v   0              0              0
                                                       2                             1/2
                                                                   4
                                                                 R
                                                                   0
                                                      2+ L2 + 2 R  L Cos 0     2  i
                                                 ro                0        0
        and we  recall  that  a  is  measured  relative to  an  angle $ whic2h is equation 75
        evaluated  at  Rolp 00 or
                                                                   3/2
                       Sin 00        R  + L2  + 2 R  L Cos 0               - R 3
                                       0           0                           0
        3   tan-1                 L                                              -      -     (88)
                                                      3/2
  7                     R 2  + L2 + 2 R  L Cos 00           Cos 00  -  R 2 L +  R 3 Cos 00      -
                        0              0                              0        0

                                                                                       45
                  To complete our analysis, we must express p and a in terms of R, 0, 0,
             Ro-i and 00.  We find
                                           2                                       2
                  [R Cos 0 -  R  Cos  0      +[R, Sin 00    R Sin 0 Cos (o - oo)]     +
                           2    0      01
                                                                           1/2
                                                                      2
                                            IR Sin 0 Sin       Oo)]                   (89)
             this can be reduded to
                                                                                    1/2
             p =  R2+ R 02 _ 2 R R0   Cos 0. Cog 0 - Sin 00 Sin2 0 Cos                   (90)
             We can solve for a in terms of R, 0, 00,     and p to be
                                              O-
                                  R Sin (O
             a = 360      Sin-           p                                            (91)
                   We now have a multitude of equations but they provide a basis for a
             computer study of the effect of the variables.  Thus, we will revie2w the salient
             ones and group them in an orderly fashion for computer study.
                   Sensitivity.  The magnitude of the electric field at any point in space
             can be found from equation 74 when R,+ R 0 and 0 = 00.  Equation 74 becomes
             equation 87 which is assumed linear throughout the perturbation.  The magnitude
             of the electric field is
                                         2 R 2  (R  + L Cos Oo)
     2                 Q                     0     0
             F,                                                          +             (92)
              0   4 7 c  R 2          [R  2 + L2 + R  L Cos 0,] '12
                       w  0              0          0
                               L                                                           - 1/2
                                                                         R 4
           0                                                                0
                                                             2                         2
                                                          IR0  + L +  2  R0L Cos 001

                                                                                       5
             The angle of this field relative tD the y axis  in  the  R0 -y axis plane is given
             by equation 75 which for R = Ro, 0    00 becomes
                                                               3/
                                       2   2                     2      3
                        Sin (Do         + L  + 2 R  L Cos 00          R
    2                                 0            0                    0
                  tan                                 3/                                      (93)
                          2 + L 2 + 2 R  L Cos 00      2   Cos 0, - R 2       3
                          10           0         1                   0  L + R0  Cos 00
             This field creates a pertii!bation field in a remote object  of  radius  r  and
    2         dielectric c .  The potential of the perturbation field is given by equation
                          x
             86 which is
                          c    c           r3
                    u     x -  w               E   Cos a                                (94)
                    x    c  + 2 E          p2   0
                          x        v
             Unfortunately, p and a are in terms of a secondary coordinate s2ystem.  Our
             primary coordinate system is R, 0,0.  Equation 90 expresses p in terms of
             R, R0  0, 00, 0, and 00 .  This is the first place where the perturbation angle
                is important. The expression  for  p  is
                                                                                     1/2
             p      2+ R 2 _ 2  R  R   Cos 00 Cos"O - Sin 0 Sin 0, Cos (o - 200)
                        0          0
                                                                                        (95)
             The angle a can be expressed in terms of R, R 0   0,00.@, and @o
             However, it is simpler to express it as
                                      R  Sin  0 - 00)
               a = 3600        Sin-1                     -.00 - a                       (96)
       1                                     p
             The undistorted potential about the fish  is the negative gradient of the sum
             of equations 70 and  71  or

                                                                                      51
                   U0                                                                 (97)
                         4 Tr cw   L R      [R2 + L2 + 2 R L  Cos 01 1/2
                   Speaking anthropomorphically, the  fish  knowsU0  R, L, 0,       and
              4 -ff  cw.  It must determine Rol 00 00, r and 47E2  X' To find these variables,
              it makes an analysis of-the potential function U  + U .  Exactly how this
                                                                0   x
              analysis is made is unknown.
                   As an approach to determine how the fish might operate, we shall find
              the ratio Ux/u0 at different points along the fish for different values of
              Ex1, r, R0, 00, and     @DO).  The equations are rather complex, and require
              a computer analysis.  Thus, a fortran  computer program was written which
              -manipulates and evaluates the desired variables.
                   In the computer program, certain variables have been assigned values for
              reasons that are discussed below.
                   The length of the generator organ has been set at one meter.  In this
              way, measures can be referenced in terms of ge2nerator organ lengths.  Thus,
              range, perturbating cbject size, and electroreceptor locations are all dis-
              cussed in terms of generator organ lengths.  The dielectric of the perturbat-
              ing object has been expressed in terms of the dielectric of water.  In other
              words the analysis is in terms of cw/Ex rather than cx or cw themselves.
                   The fish is defined as a cylinder two times as long as the elect0-k-ic gen-
              erator organ, with a radius O.'2 times the generator length,  Six longitudinal
              bands of eleven receptors are assigned along the length of the cylinder. Three
              bands, each band 15 degrees apart, are located on each side of the fish. The
              center band on each side is assumed to be in the same plane as the center of
              !,he pertlirbing object and the axis of the cylinder.

                                                                                  52
                 The computer program analysed various combinations of four factors:
             1) the ratio of e /E or the ratio of the dielectric constant of water to
             the dielectric constant of the object, 2) the distance in generator lengths
             from the center of the cylinder to the center of the perturbing object,
             3) the angle in radians formed by the cylinder2 axis and -',he vector from the
             cylinder center to the center of the perturbing object, and 4) the radius of
             the perturbing object in.generator lengths,
                  With each combination of the above factors, the program had the computer
             manipulate and print out values of three variables that describe receptor
             position and also the associated ratio of perturbation potential to free field
             potential.  The three variables wer2e manipulated to show the effect on the
             perceived potential ratio.  These variables are defined as: (R) the line
             segment from the center of the cylinder to the receptor on the cylinder sur-
             face,(O) the angle formed by the intersection of line segment R and the cylinder
             axis, (o - @,)the angle defined by the intersection of the plane passing
             through the center of the object and cylinder axis and the plane pa2ssing through
             the cylinder axis and a band of eleven receptors on the fish's surface.  In
             the actual printout, this angle was taken for each of six receptors defined
             by the same radius r and angle 0 (Ux/ u0 ) the ratio of the potential due to the
             perturbation and that due to the dipole effect in the free field.
                  The following are the primary conclusions from the computer analysis of
             the electrostatic m2odel:
                  The value of the signal (disturbance/free field) is the same at receptors
             15 degrees above and below the receptors on the plane defined by the cylinder
             axis, receptor band, and center of the perturbing object.
                  The magnitude of the signal is largest I-Ln most circumstances at the ',,lead
              e,-,d of the simulated fish. (This may explain the high concentration of electro-
              3receptors on #"he head of the actual.fish).

                    The magnitude of the signal is smallest at the cylinder surface closest
                to the two poles of the generator dipole.
                    Assuming the fish can detect a signal of one part per million (humans can
                detect sounds 1/1,000,000 th normal speech loudness) the fish can easily detect
                objects of dielectric 0.1 times water whose radius is 0.1 generator organ
         2       lengths, at distances to the side of 6 generator lengths.  It would have diffi-
                culties at 10 lengths or for dielectrics of 0.5 or 5 times water. 7
                    With the assumed sensitivity, the fish could detect objects of dielectric
                0.1 water, assuming object radius is 0.1 generator organ lengths at 10 elec-
                tric organ lengths if approached from front or rear.
                    Objects of diele2ctric 10 times water could be detected at a considerab7-e
                angle from the direct front or rear approaches at  10  lengths.
                    An indication of receptor sensitivity for objects of dielectric 10 times
                water and 0.1 water with a radius of one length is given in table I.
                                               Table I
                                       Receptor Sensitivity
                Detection Distanc2e                                 Receptor Discrimination
                  1 length                                              1  part  100
                  10 lengths                                            I  part  10,000
                  100 lengths                                           1  part  1,000,000
                  1000 lengths                                          1  part  1002,000,000
                                                                                   10
                  10,000 lengths                                        1 par'.  10
                    The analysis shows that the signal is about twice as large for dielectrics
                10 times water as it is for objects with dielectrics 0.1 times water.
                f  'i'tie (iielectric of water is3 approximately 81, plastics ire about 8, air
                   is about 1, and metals would be extremely hi,ch, virtually infiiiite in
                   m,ljiy cases.

                                                                                  54
            System Level
                 Although the data does not exist for the fish, it is reasonable to
            assume that it has a data processing capability similar to that found in other
            comparable organisms. Thus, it is likely that the fish  can  use  inhibitory
            and facilitating circuits to sharpen the aforementioned data from the receptor,
            extract signal from noise2 and classify multiple incoming signals.  In essence,
            it would function as a system at the receptor level with interactions among
            receptors and at the whole organism level involving the receptors, generator,
            and brain.  For example, there is evidence that a plot of receptor potential
            along a band of receptors would yield, for a single perturbing object, a uni-
            moda.1 curve (Hagiwara & Morita, 1963).  We might suggest that th2e configuration
            of the curve is a function of the overall impedence of the perturbing object,
            defining impedance as the sum of the resistance and the reactance of the object.
            The reactance of an object is given by
                                  1
                 X   2 7 F L ( :@#                                               (98)
                               2 7 F C
                       where X is reactance
                   2          F is frequency
                             L is the inductance in henrys of the object under observation.
                             C is the capacitance in farads of the object under observation.
                 As may be seen, by operating as a system by coordinating the  generator
            and receptor function, the fish by changing generator frequency can induce a
            lower or higher overall effective impedance in the object,  If an object had
            an impedance very5 similar to that of water, the fish could enhance its  dis-
            crimination and classification ability by varying its frequency; making  the
            object create a greater or lesser potential gradient at the receptor.  Thus, if

                                                                                            55
                 the fish was trying to locate a certain known object, it could adjust its
                 frequency to optimize its detection of the object.  Using this system approach
                 it would also be possible for the fish to sense differences  in  objects  that
                 have the same exterior physical appearance.  This would be done through vary-
                 ing the fr2equency and sensing and comparing the changes in  the  reactance  of
                 the objects.  At least some species of fish seem to be using the foregoing
                 system approach.  In.the earlier discussion of the available biological data,
                 it was noted that a generator frequency shifting technique was used.
                       There also appear to be mechanisms that can be used to optimize detection
                 and classification of one stationary object among2 several  stationary  objects
                 or a moving object among stationary objects.  For example, to detect a moving
                 object several scans could be carried out, stored, and compared.  In this way,
                 stationary objects in the field -would be nulled and only objects of  changing
                 impedance or location would be perceived.
                                                   CONCLUSION
                      Although there is a fairly substantial data base, 2we  find that very
                 little can be applied to the development of an understanding of sense mechanism
                 and sensitivity.  This is due in part to the fact that pioneering data in this
                 area, as it is in most areas, tend to have faults no matter how competent the
                 investigators.  One of the prime deficiencies in the reported work is the use
                 of a tank of inadequate size or with extraneous objects in  the  field.  These
              2   distort the field and seriously effect the data obtained.  Further,  the  data
                 base contains very little behavioral data.
                      Thus, we undertook several tasks to provide a basis to assess the fishes'
                 electrosensing mechanism and capability, using the data  presently  available.
                      Through limited experimental work with electrical  fields,  sensors,  and
                 ,ob    in various size bo9dies of water we have gathered data which, when
                  .jt2cts

                                                                                        56
                taken with the mathematical analysis, provides a specification for tank size,
                fish location, and attachments, that will yield valid data in future studies.
                We found that for experimental results to be considered valid there should
                be at least 5 electric organ lengths of water surrounding the fish.  For free
                swimming e2xperiments, it would be best to have at least 10 electric organ
                lengths about the fish.  When the fish must be restrained near the surface,
                10 organ lengths of water in all other directions should be the  minimum.
                It should also be noted that to simulate infinity in research, the tank must
                be connected to earth ground and made to conduct.  This does not seem to have
                been done in past research.
                 2     We have suggested as a working hypothesis an electrosensor mechanism.
                This hypothesis is subject to test and thereby may provide the means  for
                collapsing the current multiple crude categorizations of the receptor that is
                so typical of a new area of investigation.  The hypothesis may also provide a
                basis for analyzing higher interactions in the fishes' nervous system and
                thereby increase our understanding of t2he sense.
                      We have also, through mathematical analysis, shown the linkage among the
                various neural coding schemes suggested for the fish and have shown their
                essential identity.
                      We have also developed a mathematical model of the fish based upon the
                useable experimental data.  A set of equations describing function was develop-
                ed on the model and these equations linked to available experime7ntal data.
                The mathematical model was analysed by a computer to ascertain the sensitivity
                of the fish at the receptor and to determine the effects of manipulating a
                number of variables.  These variables included fish size, object size, object
                electrical characteristics, object distance from the fish, direction and angle
                of the object from the fishes' axis, etc.  From the computer analysis, we

               deter.mined the sensitivity to various perturbing objects under a variety 6f
               conditions and found the fish to be auite sensitive particular--L'y in certain
               directions.

                                                                                     58
                                              REFERENCES
                  .galides, E.  Investigation of electric and magnetic sensitive f4-shes.--
                    Final report, Office of Naval Research, 1965.
                  Lljure, E.F.  Neuronal control system of electric organ discharges in
                    Mormyridae.  University Microfilms, Inc., An2n Arbor, 1964.
                  3ennett, M.V.L. Comparative physiology of electric  organs.  Ann.  Review
                    of physiology, 1970, 32; 471-528.
                  Bennett, M.V.L. Electroreceptors in Mormyrids. Cold  Spring  Harbor  Symposia
                    on Quantitative Biology, 1965, XXX, 245-262.
                  Bennett, M.V.L. Electrosensory systems in electric  fish.  Finpl  report,
                    Air Force Of2fice of Scientific Research, 1969.
                  Bennett, M.V.L.  Mechanisms of Electroreception.  Lateral line detectors.
                    P. Cahn, ed., Indiana University University Press, 1967, 313-393.
                  Bennett, M.V.L. Neural control of electric organs.  The  central  nervous
                    system and fish behavior.  David Ingle, ed., University of Chicago,
                    1968, 147-167.
                  Bennett, 2M.V.L., Pappas, G., Aljure, E., Nakajima, Y.  Physiology  and  ultra-
                    structure of  electrotonic junctions. II.  Spinal and medullary electromotor
                    nuclei in mormyrid fish.  J. Neurophysiology, 1967, 30; 180-208.
                  Bennett, M.V.L. Pappas,  G., Gimenez M., Nakajima, Y.  Physiology  and  ultra-
                    structure of  electrotonic Junctions.IV. Medullary electromotor nuclei in
           2         gymnotid fish.  J. Neurophysiology, 1967, 30; 236-300.
                  Bullock, T.H.  Biological Sensory Vistas in Science.  University of New Mexico
                    Press, 1968, 176-2o6.
                  Bullock, T.H., Chichibu, S.  Further analysis of sensory coding in electro-
                    receptors of electric fish.  Proceedings of the National Academy of
                    Sciences, 1965, 54, 422-429.
                  2Clark, L., Granath, L.P. A measure of the threshold sensitivity  of  Gymnotus
                    carapo to electric fields.  American Zoologist, 1967, 7, 130.
                  Derbin, C., Szabo, T.  Ultrastructure of an electroreceptor (Knollenorgan)
                    in the mormyrid fish Gnathonemus petersii. 1, J.  Ultrastructure  Res.,
                    1968, 22, 269-484.
                  Dohlmaii, G. Electro-physiologie et physio patho6logie de llappareil vestibul-
                    aire.  (Some aspects of the mechanisms of vestibula hair cell stimulation).
                    Confin. Neurol. 1960, 20, 169.
                  Enger, P.S. and Szabo, T.  Effect of temperature on the discharge rates of
                    the electric organ of some gymotids. Comp.Biochem. Physiol, 1968, 27,
                    625-627.

                                                                                       59
                  Erskine, R.T., Howe, D.W., Weed, B.C. The discharge  period  of  the  weakly
                     electric fish Sternarchus albifrons. American  Zoologist,  1966,  6,  79.
                  Frohlich, H.  Theory of Dielectrics.  Oxford University Press, London,1958.
                  Granath, L.P., Sachs, H.G. Erskine,  F.T.  III.  Electrical 2 sensitivity  of
                     a weakly electric fish.  Life Sciences, 1967, 6, 2373-2377.
                  Hagiwara, S., Kusano, K., Negishi, I.  Physiological properties of electro-
                     receptors in sdme gy=otids. J. General  Physiology,  1962,  45,  6oo-6ol.
                  Hagiwara, S. & 14orita, H. Coding mechanisms of  electroreceptor  fibers  in
                     some electric fish.  J. Neurophysiology, 19263, 26, 551-67.
                  Hagiwara, S., Szabo, T., and Enger, P.S.  Physiological properties of electro-
                     receptors in the electric eel, Electrophorus electricus.  J. Neurophysiol.,
                     1965, 28, 775-83.
                  Heller, J., Teixeira-Pinto, A., Nejelski, L. & Cutler, J. Experimental Cell
                     Research, 1960, 20, 548
                  Herzberg, G.  Molecular Spectra.and Molec2ular Structure.  D.  Van Nostrand Co.,
                     Inc., Princeton, 1950.
                  Jackson, J.U.  Classical Electrodynamics.  John Wiley & Sons, Inc. N.Y. 1962.
                  Larimer, J.L. & MacDonald, J.S. Sensory feedback  from  electroreceptors  to
                     electromotor pacemaker centers, in gymnotids.  American J. of Physiology,
                     1968, 215, 1253-1261.
                  Lissnann,H.W.2  Electric location by fishes.  Sci. Amer., 1963, 50-59.
                  Lissmann,H.W" Machin, K.E.  The mechanism of object location in Gymnarchus
                     niloticus and similar fish.  Journal Exptl. Biology, 1958, 35, 451-86.
                  Lissmann,F.R.S. & '4ulli-nger Ann M.  Organization of ampullary electric
                     receptors in Gymnotidae.  Proceeding of the Royal Society, 1968,
              2       169, 335-378.
                  Lissmann,H.W. & Schwassman, H.O. Activity rhythm of an  electric  fish  Gym-
                     norhamphiethys hypostomus, ellis, Zei'@schrift fut vergleichende  Physio-
                     logie, 1965, 51, 153-171.
                  MacDonald, J.A. & Larimer, J.L.  Phase-sensitivity of Gymnotus carapo to
                     low-amplitude electric'stimuli. Z. Vergl. Phy2siologie, 1970, 70, 322-334.
                  '.1andriota, F.J., Thompson, L., Bennett, M.V.L.  Classical conditioning of
                     electric organ discharge rate in mormyrids. Sci.  150,  1965,  1740-1742.
                  i-linkoff, L.A., Clark, W.L., Sachs, H.G.  Interspike interval analysis of the
                     discharge of a weakly electric Mormyrid fish.  American  Zoologist  1967,
5                     7, 131.

                                                                                      6o
              O'Leary, D.P.  An electrokinetic model of transduction in the semicircular
                 canal.  Biophysical Journal, 1970, 10, 859-875.
              Saito, M.,Schwan, H. & Sehwarz, G. Response of non spherical biological
                 particles to alternating electric fields.  Biophysical J. 1966,6,313-27.
              Steinbach, A.B.  Diurna2l movements and discharge characteristics of electric
                 gymnotid fishes in the Rio Negro, Brazil. Biol. Bul,1,1970,138,200-210.
              Suga, N.  Coding in tuberous and ampullary organs of a gy=otid electric fish
                 J. Comp.  Neurology, 1967, 131, 437-452.
              Suga, N.  Electrosensitivity of canal and free neuromast organs in a gymnotid
                 electric fish.  J. Comparative Neurology, 1967, 1312, 453-458.
              Suga, N.  Electrosensitivity of specialized and ordinary lateral line organs
                 of the electric fish, gymnotus carapo. Lateral Line Detectors.  P.Cahn,
                 ed, Indiana University Press, 1967, 394-4og.
              Szabo, T. & Hagiwara, S.  A latency-change mechanism involved in sensory
                 coding of electric fish.  (Mormyrids) Physiology & Behavior, 1967, 2
                 331-335.
  2            Szabo, T. The origin of electric organs of Electrophorus  electricus.  The
                 Anatomical Record, 1966, 155, 103-110.
              de Vries, H.L. The-minimum perceptible angular acceleration under various
                 conditions.  Acta Oto-Laryngeal, 1949, 37, 218.
              van Beek, L.K.H. The dielectric behavior of heterogeneous  systems.  Prog.
                 Dielectric, 1967, 7, 69.
              Wa5chtel, A.W.  The ultrastructure relationships of electric organs and muscle.
                 J. Morph, 1964, 114, 325-360.

                                                                                     61
                                            APPENDIX
                                             Symbols
                   0    The angle between the Y-axis and the radius vector from the positive
                        charge to an arbitrary point in space.
                   (DI  The angle between the Y-axis and the radius vector from the negative
                        charge to an arbitra2ry point in space.
                   E),  The angle between the Y-axis and the radius vector from the charge
                        to the center of the perturbing object.
                   R    The radius vector from the positive charge to an arbitrary point in
                        space.
                   R'   The radius vector from the negative charge to an arbitrary point in
                        space.
                   R0   The radius vector from 2the positive charge to the center of the
                        perturbing object.
                        The angle between the X-axis and the X-z projection of the radius
                        vector from the positive charge to an arbitrary point in space
                        The angle between the X-dxis and the X-z projection of the radius
                        vector from the positive charge to the center of the perturbing
                        object
                 6       The charge on either side of the dipole.
                   L    The length of the dipole.
                   Ew   The dielectric of the water.
                   cx   The dielectric of the perturbation.
                   r    The diameter of the spherical perturbing object.
                   0    The electric field at the center of the perturbation as if the
                        perturbation were not present.

                                                                                          62
                  ux     The potential due to the interaction between the dipole field and
                         the perturbation.
                  v      A coordinate centered at Mc perturbation opposed to the vector
                         E0 and in the Y axis -R0 plane.
                  m      A coordinate perpendicular to the w axis in the Y-P 0 plane
            2             originating at the center of the perturbation.
                         The angle between E0 an'" a line parallel to the Y-axis at the center
                         of the perturbation.
                  p      A radius vector in the w, m coordinate system to an arbitrary point
                         in space.
                  a      The angle between the radius vector and the coordinate w.
                  E+     The electric field due to the positive charge.
   2               i      Unit vector in the direction YR
                  r
                  E-     The electric field due to the negative charge.
                  i      Unit vector in the direction of R'.
                  r
                  EX -Z  The X-z component of the'-electric field.
                  u0     Potential due to uniform approximation of the dipole field.
                  uI     Potential inside sphere due to uniform approximation2 of dipole field.
                  E      The Y component of the electric field
                  y
                  y      End point of charge path.
                  a      Radius of sphere in dipoi-e arrangement.
                  I      Current
                  p      Macrczcopic polarization
                  N      The number of molecules per volume.
                  pmos   Related to the macroscopic polarization (electric dipole moment per
                   9      vol=e)

                                                                                        63
                  Xe    -'he electric susceptibility.
                  E     Storing force.
                  x     End point of charge path
                  pind  Induced dipole moment.
                  T     Threshold function.
                  T     Maximl,Tn threshold.
                  max
                  T .   Minimum threshold.
                  m3.n
        2          Tc    Exponential time constant.
                        Charge
                  Y+    Dummy variable (positive charge).
                  y-    Dummy variable (negative charge).
                  v     Absolute voltage.
                  v     Voltage
                  c     Capacitance
                  i     Current density.
                  D     Distance between charges
                  A     A constant to be determined from the boundary conditions.
  9                B     A constant to be determined from the boundary conditions.
                  x     Reactance
                  L     Inductance
                  u     Potential in terms-of the coordinate system.
                  w0    Radian frequency of harmonic oscillation.
                        Reactance in polar corrdinates.

