                        INVESTIGATION OF ELECTRIC FISHES
                         FINAL REPORT     PHASES 1 AND 2
                                        by
                                   Prepared under
                             Contract
                                    August 1974

                                       SUMMARY
                 Electric fishes have one or more transmitting electric organs and an
           array of electroreceptors.  The system is controlled by special nuclei lo-
           cated in the brain.  The elements of the electric transmitting organs, called
           electroplates, are described; and the electromotive force (EMF) generated
           by each electroplate and of the entire organ is discussed.  The waveform of
 2          the signals was studied and the structure of the electric organs investigated.
           The biochemistry of the chemotransmitter and the metabolism of the electro-
           genic tissue is discussed.  The physiology of the electric transmitting organs
           was studied, and their common properties described. Analogy has been made
           between the electrogenic properties of muscular tissue and the electric organs
           of fishes.  The transversal and lateral resis2tance of the electric tissue of
           the electric eel and torpedo is mentioned.
                  Electroreceptors are special sensors of the lateral line system. Some
           fishes possess electroreceptors and no electric transmitting organ.  The dif -
           ferent kind of electroreceptors are mentioned.  The physiology of some of
           the electroreceptors of Sternarchus albifrons, a South-American fresh water
           weakly electric fish were investigated.  The electrorece2ptors of the mormyrid
           Gnathonemus petersii were mapped and counted.
                  Tonic and phasic electroreceptors were studied.  The nervous control
           and function of the electroreceptors is discussed and the functional character-
           istics of six different kinds of lateral line organs have been considered.
                  The location of objects by the electroreceptor system of elettric fish
           is discussed and communication between electric fishes mentioned.

                  The electric field lntterii around the electric fish SternarclitLs albifrons
           has been plotted and compared with the theoretical pattern of  a  dipole.  The
           perturbing effects of various confinement cages on the  electromagnetic  field
           pattern were determined.  Distortions of the wave form with distance were
           recorded.
                  The maximum detection range of the electric  fishes  Gnatlionemtis  sp.
           and Gymnotus carapo to stainless steel, iron, brass and  nylon  is  presented.
           At the critical separation between the fish and sample, (assumed to be the
           threshold detection distance) the fish increased the rate of its signals or
           ceased transmission entirely. The effects  of  sample  material,  sizes,  form
           and azimuth on the threshold detection distance are presented.  Behavioral
           experiments  have been formed using  Gymnarchus  2niloticus  to  determine  the
           threshold of detection distances.  These experiments were also performed in
           the fiberglass tank with and without an aluminum foil liner.  Photos and movie
           films were made to record the fishes behavior.
                  Gnathonemus sp. is a fresh water, low rate, high frequency pulse
           weak electric African mormyrid fish.  Gymnotus carapo is a fresh water,
           medium rate, medium frequency pulse, weak electric South-Ame2rican
           gy=otid fish.  Despite their physiological and electric differences, both
           these fishes stopped transmitting electric siamls if the object .vas of high
           conductance and was brouaht close to the fish (< 50 cm).  Because  the  fishes
           were very excited and tried to escape even after they had ceased transmittina,
           it seems reasonable to assume that they continue to detect the objects in  the
           water usincr the8ir sensors in a passive mode.
                  The electroreceptors of Gnathonemus sp. were mapped to location
           and morpholocrical type and related to the area. We recorded the response
           of some electroreceptors of Gnathonemus sp.      The presence of one  type  of
           receptor in the sensor matrix which is sensitive to mechanical movement
           was established.

                   A qualitative assessment of the fishes ability to mvigite within a
            difficult maze of nylon fishinm line has been made.  Blind electric fishes
            (Gymn,,trchus niloticus, Sterii,.irchus albifrons, and Gymnotus carapo) easily
            navigate through such mazes.  Photos and movie film were made.  These
            behavior experiments were performed in a 12 foot diameter fiberglass tank
            2and under two separate electric boundary conditions.
                   The threshold sensitivity for detection of a magnetic field is pre-
            sented in graphic form for: Gymnarchus niloticu@;, Sternarchus albifrons
            and Gnathonemus sp.  Photos were made and the behavior of the fishes has
            been filmed.
                   The threshold detection limits of Gy=archus niloticus and Gnathonemus
            sp. was determined for a D.C. electric field u2nder two different electrical
            boundary conditions.  The reactions of Gyliinarchus niloticus, Gnathonemus sp.
                             lbifrons, to recordinos of their own electrical signals and to
            and Sternarchus a
            those of other individuals of the same species are presented under tnvo very
            .different electrical backgrounds.  Photos and movie films were taken.
                   We arrived at the  conclusio-n that2 our knowledge of electroreceptors
            arrays and lateral line sensory receptors of electric fishes is incomplete, In-
            vesti,a,ation in their function and biochemical composition would put us in the
            position of designing systems havina similar properties with electric fishes
            for underwater detection, location and identification of objects.  The importance
            of neurotransmitters is stressed and the role of electric fishes in the study of2
            these complex energetic systems is mentioned.  Electric fishes offer some
            unique properties in the study of electrophysiolotcry and neurochemistry.

                                             CONTENTS
             1.      INTRODUCTION                          ..............................     I
            2.       TECHNICAL DISCUSSION                        ........................     6
                     2.1   THE TRANSMITTING ELECTRIC ORGANS OF
                           ELECTRIC FISHES                       ........................     6
                           2.1.1   The  Electromotive  Force   2of   Electric   Organs         6
                           2.1.2   The Waveform of Electric Signals             .........     6
                           2.1.3   The Structure of the Electric Organs          ........   12
                           2.1.4   Chemical Composition of the Chemotransmitter
                                   and the Metabolism of the Electrogenic Tissue            12
                           2.1.5   Physiology of the Electric Organ     ...........   2      22
                     2. 2  ELECTRORECEPTORS           AND            ELECTRORECEPTION       30
                           2.2.1   Distribution  of  the   Electrosensory   Receptors       32
                           2.2.  2 Tonic and Phasic Electroreceptors            .........   36
                           2. 2. 3 The Control and Function of the Electro-
                                   receptors                  ...........................   44
                  2         2.2.  4 Active Electroreception               ................   49
                           2.2.  5 Passive Electroreception     ......              ...     51
                                                                        E le
                           2.2.6   Coding of the Electrical Signal of       ctri
                                   Fishes                    ............................   52
                     2.3  EXPERIMENTAL FINDINGS      5      ..................               53
                           2. 3. 1  Methods                   ...........................   53
                           2. 3. 2  The Electromagnetic Field Generated by
                                   Sternarchus albifrons a South American Fresh
                                   Water Weakly Electric Fish              ..............   57
                                                  iv

                             CONTENTS (Cont'd.)
                2.4  BEHAVIOR EXPERIMENTS FILMED ON STANDARD
                    8  FILM ...............                      77
                    2.4.1 ExperimeiitsNeededtoAssessSensitivity,
                          Range and Effectiveness of the Electric Fishes
                          to Detect Objects and Communicate Under-
                          water .....................  o ......  77
                23. 5BEHAVIORAL EXPERIMENTS USING  PHYSIOLOGICAL
                    METHODS  .........................   o . . . .. 94
          3.    CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS  ...   ........  96
                REFERENCES  ..................         ........  99
                                    v

                                      1.  INTRODUCTION
                       In this final report we would like to mention and summarize the
            morphological,, physiological and behavioral aspects of some electric fishes.
                   (1)              .(2)
            Darwin     and Dahlgreen     consider the electric organs of fishes as a  dif-
            ficult case to be explained by what evolutionary steps they may have been
          2  produced.  Except the ltuig-snail Daudebardia from Asia Minor which has
            been reported as electrogenic by Leder and mentioned by Garten     (3) the
            only class in the animal kingdom known to possess specialized electric
            organs is the class of fishes.  The electric transmitting organs are derived
            in most electric fishes from modified muscular tissue. We observed
            this fact in Gy=archus niloticus, an African fresh-water weakly
   2         electric fish.  But therc are exceptions like the South American fresh-
            water weakly electric fish Sternarchus albifrons,, whose transmitting
            electric organ is derived from modified nervous tissue.  Mutations by
            virtue of change enhanced the survival and fitness of the orc,-anism., giving
            it a superiority over the other species either in communication.,  in  naviga-
            tion, or food findina and 2defense  against  enemies.  Because  the  successive
            mutations stand the test of natural selection, they produced an organism
            greatly different from its distant forebears.
                      Communication in its large interpretation encompasses any in-
            formation needed to produce a change in a state.  Change from one state
            into another raises entropy, and energy is needed to raise the state from one
            level to the other. Compared w1ith the complete electrochemical communication
            system of the electric fishes, all otliers used by livin- organisms are less
            efficient. By its nature, the nervous system uses  electrical  impulses  as  a

            communication me-ins.  In order to communicate and use a langmge,
            human beings have to transform electrical and chemical onergy'into mech-
            anical and acoustical energy for transmitting messages and to transform
            optical, acoustical, or mechanical encrgy into electrical and  chemical
            energy for receiving messages. Alivays energy is lost and entropy is
            raised.
           2        Electric fishes are the only ones which use only electrochemical
            energy for communication purposes with minimum loss in energy and mini-
            mum rise in entropy.  Fishes can communicate reliably underwater, but
            we have difficulties in doing this although we dispose of energies many
            orders of maomitude larger than those used by fishes.
                   For this reason and for their ability to use their electrosensory
            syst2em for detection, identification and location of underwater ob ects it
            seemed appropriate to study some of the electric fishes, their transmitting
            ora,,ans and their electroreceptors. An investigation has been conducted
            for the                     for a period of three years which resulted in
            a final report.   Behavioral and physiological  experiments  have  been
            conducted by the author on the Electrophoridae, Sternarchidae, Gymnotidae,
            Mormyridae, Gy=archidae, and Malapteruridae.                        -her in-
                                                                        . I 1. I 04L
            vestigators have studied the physiology, the morphology and behavior of a
            few species of electric fishes, but the subject is far from being completely
            understood. The author studied also the morphology  and  physiology  of
            electric fishes in2 connection with the detection and location of objects and
            underil,-ater communication.  For the investigation mostly Sternarchidae
            were used, but some limited findings in Mormir@dae and Gymnarchidae have
            also been studied. We found     that the electric fishes could use tli4ir
            electric organs (transmittin- and receivinr,,) for navic,,ation and communication--
     5                                   t>
            in other words, pattern recognition.
                                                2

                   The electric signal recordin6rs ,Lnd Iiistolo,rical evidence indicate  that
            Steniarchus albifroils has three kinds of clectroreceptors: ampullary tonic
            nonsyncliroiious units, aiiipullary tonic synchronous units, and tuberous phasic
            nonsynchronous units. - -  i Both are represented by a generator connected to
            resistances and2 capacitances in series and in parallel. FThe difference between
            tonic and pli-isic electroreceptors is that the former have one resistance in
            series with the generator whereas the phasic electroreceptors have a cap-
            acitance. The tonic electroreceptors  seem  to  predominate  at  a  ratio  of  ap-
            proximately five-to-one, compared to the phasic electroreceptors.           The
            electr2oreceptors seem to act, to a  certain  extent,  independently  of  the  main
            electric transmitting organ; at least two of the three types of electroreceptors
                                       (8
            are asynchronous.  Szabo      found that the'complete denervation of the trans-
            mittina electric organ does not stop the activity of the asynchronous electro-
            receptors (both phasic and tonic). The fish is  still  capable  of  responding  to
    2        conductive and nonconductive objects placed near the fish's body.  DenerNation
            of the transmitting organ will affect the cap-ability of certain movement or im-
            pair., to a certain ex-tent the ability to recognize patterns-@ Some of  the  syn-
            chronous tonic units are connected to the same nerve trunk as the acousti-
            colateralis system and connected to-specialized big nuclei in the brain.
                    The most strikinc2, fact about fresh  water  weak  electric  fish,  besides
                                      t@,
            their spontaneous electric organ, is that all of them are provided with a
            hi,-
              ,hly developed lateralis line system.  Related to this acoustico-lateralis
            system is an enlargement of the cerebellum, especi     ally in Gymnarchus
            niloticus and in mormyridae.     @l-le unusual importance of the lateralis syste3m
            in these fish, compared with other teleosts, is not due to an increased nul-nber
            of "ordinary" lateral line sensory organs, but rather to the existence of a
            great number of specialized sensory organs within this same syste
                                                  3

                        'niis is supporting our Ilypotlicsis -ibout a hybrid complex underwater
               p,ittern recognition systeiii used by electric fislils in recognition of prey,  prc.!
               dators and navigation in  -oneral.  It  is  recommended  that  tlle  other  lateralis
               line systems from different fresh water weak electric fishes should2 be studied
               with the aim  to find out the role of the differen t sensory  organs  in  pattern  re-
               cognition.
                       Filier subdivisions exist between the one  and  the  same  type  of  electro-
                                                                                         (40)
               receptor, but this has not been as yet investigated in a detailed way.
               Knowledge of the physiolo2gy and biochemistry of the electroreceptors are
               incomplete.  These studies will provide a basis for understanding the work-
               ing of the system.  Microelectrode recordings from the electroreceptors
               proper and from their nerve fibers are needed to provide information concern-
               ing the function of the receiving system.
                       By combinina the anatomical and functional data of these fishes it
               could be possibl2e to simulate an equivalent underwater sensory system.
               7@vo double feedback mechanisms are envisaged: (1) a system tranqmittina'
               a constant frequency electric field and using a phase-synclironous electro-
               receptor responding to either discontinuities in the electric field  or  to  chancres
               in the phase relationship betm7een the transmitting and receptors; and (2). a
           2    second one represented by a variable frequency transmitter and receptor
               with a change of frequency.  An ind--pendent dual autorhythmic receptor
                                                                              Z,-          7th
               system could be designed and: (a) increasing or decreasina the autorh3  mic
               frequency dependinc, on the direction of movement of the disturbance in the
   8            electric field; and (b) responding with a chan-e in the latency depending on
               the maciiitude of the disturbance, also distiii,,,-uisliino- between conductive
               and nonconductive objects.
                                                     4

                   In any case the key to the object detection, location and identification
           by electric fishes is their electrosensory receptors and the other lateral line
           detectors.  The difficulties are multiple: some of the electric fishes are dif-
           ficult to obtain; are susceptible to diseases; their nutritional requirement is
           not known; they are often injure2d and/or subjected to chemical treatments
           before shipment; and are intolerant of proloii-ed periods of confined experi-
           mentation.
                   The Phase I Final Report     described the location and distribution of
           electroreceptors and a mechanical receptor of the lateral line system of the
           African fresh Nvater weakly electric fish Giiathonemus petersii.  The auto-
           rh37thn-lic2 activity of these electroreceptors has been recorded.  The variation
           of the electric signal of the electric organ has been recorded for three speci-
           mens of this species  at rest activity and at the maximum signal rate.  The
           number and density of different kinds of electroreceptors in the dermis were
           counted and their rate change sensitivity to a metallic object recorded.
                                                5

                                  2.  TECHNICAL DISCUSSION
              2.1    THE TRANSMITNNG ELECTRIC ORGANS OF ELECTRIC FISHES
              2.1.1  The Electromotive Force of Electric Organs
                     In Figs. I and 2 some representatives of fresh water and marine
              electric fishes and their electric organs are shown. Electrophorus
              electricus and Malapterurus electricus are fresh-water strong electric
              fishes, the first2 one attaining a maximum discharge voltage from its' main
              electric organ in excess of 600 volts, the second one only 300 volts.
              Torpedo nobiliana may discharge a train of pulses close to 220 volts and
              Astroscopus guttatus may attain 50 volts.  The latter two are marine strong
              electric fishes.  Gymnarchus nilotictis, Gnathonemus petersii and Sternarchus
              albifrons are fresh water weakly electric fishes. Raja clavata is a r2ajid
              marine weakly electric fish.  The electric discharge of some weakly electric
              fishes out of water may attain 7 to 8 volts, but in the water their voltage is
              attenuated to less than one volt in- the immediate vicinity of the fishes.
              2. 1. 2 The IVaveform of-Electric Signals
                    Figures 3 and 4 'Show the pulse shape and duration of some species
              of electric fishes. Every species has it5s own characteristic electric
              discharto,-e. Electrophorus electricus has three electric organs: the main
              electric organ, the organ of Hunter and the organ of Sachs.  The main
              electric organ and the spinal cord of Electropliorus are represented in
              Figs. 5 and 6.
                                               6

                                                     C, Ec7.0it OR /ti,
                     Fig. 1.  Principal representatives of fresh-Nvater
                              electric fishes.  Arrow indicates direction of
                              current in the electric organs.
                              E     ElectroDhorus electricus (electric eel)
                              G     Gymnar6clius niloticus
                              P     Gnathonemus petersii (elepliant-nose)
                              s     Sternarelius albifrons (b'lack-gliost)
                              M     Malapterurus electricus (electric catfish)
                                                7

                                                     +
                                                     lp
                   Fig. 2.   Principal representatives of marine electric
                             fishes.  Arrow indicates direction of current
                             in the electric oraans.
                             R =  Raja clavata (thornback ray)
                             T =  Torpedo nobiliana
                  9           A = AstroscopLis guttatus (star,,aazer)
                                               8

                                                                   >    0
                                  k-3                                                         2 50       0
                                           Ms                                                 @4 Ai
                          Gvmnotus s                                                   Gnathonenius so.
                     0
2
                                                                                           2. resp. 10
                                          Ms
                                                                                              Ms
                                    ,Nlo,-m,vri.,s fo                             E:!,;,    nia ard Sternoz)vrlu's.(Is
                                               9                                     ,,enn
                                     Fig. 3      Pulse sliape and pulse duration of
                                                 some species of electric fishes.

                                                                 Aj j _I I I I I]] j I         I   I
                                         Hypopomas  SP.2
                                         staciogents  SP.
                                                                                                                       4-4
                                         GYmnOtUS   c2orapa
                                         Sternopygus    ap.
                                         Eigenmannic  virescons
                                         Stermarchus   $P.
                                                                                                                     "I maec
                                              Fig. 4. Discharge of electric org2ans of some
                                                              Gymnotidae, Sternarchidae and
                                                             Ramphichtliydae (redr-wn after
                                                             HagiNvara and Morita(54)).
                                                                                  10

                 Fig. 5.  Tridimensional section of an Electrophorus electricus (electric
                          eel) main electric organ,, to show schematically the trajectory
                          of the electric nerves (N) from the big spinal cord cells (M) to
                          the posterior of the electroplates (E).  Only a few electroplates
                          are shown (redrawn after A. Fessard
                                  m
                                                                  10 0
                             Fig. 6.  Spinal cord of Electrophorus electriciis
                                       showing the big cells of the electric
                                       neurons (M).

               2. 1. 3  The Structure of the Electric Orgins
                     - The electric org.-in of Gymnarchus iiiloticus is shown in Fig. 7.  The
               electric organs of most electric fishes are derived from muscle tissue.
               Sternarchus albifrons is an exception.  Its electric organ is derived from
               nervous tissue (Fig. 8).
                      The electric organs of Mormyrus oxyrhyncus and Gnathonemus
         2      senegalensis are represented in Fig. 9 and 11.  The elementary units or
               building blocks of electric fishes are called electroplates (or electro-
               plaxes or electrocytes). Some mormyridae electroplates and their in-
               nervation are shown in Fig. 10, 12 and 13.
               2.1.4 Chemical Composition of the Chemotransmitter and the
                      Metabolism of the Electr--O-Crenic Ti-ssue
 2                                               t)
                      The chemotransmitter in the electric organs of electric fishes
               derived from muscle tissue is acetylcholine and its hydrolysis enzyme
               acetylcholinesterase.  The chemotransmitter involved in the electric organ
               of Sternarchus albifrons (derived from nervous tissue) is not known.
                      The electric organs of fish are an invaluable tool for studying the
               bioc2hemical mechanism underlying bioelectricity.  The organs are the most
               powerful bioelectric generators created by nature and moreover hiahly
               specialized in their function.  Most of the electric organs of electric fishes
               have unique structural features which permit the correlation of the electrical
                                               (10)
               activity with the enzyme activity.
                     Choline acetylase i5n the presence of ATP (adenosine triphosphate)
               and of CoA is capable of synthesiziiig acetylcholine in solution.  This
               enzyme is also present concomitant with acetylcholineesterase in a great
               %,ariety of conductin- tissue  motor and sensory axons, vertebrate and
                                               12

                                       E
                                                       ,-,Er's
                     Fig. 7.  Transverse section of the posterior half of a
                              Gylmiarchus niloticus.  The section of the eight
                              electric organs are shon@,n (EEI to EE8)(redrawn
                              after Fritsch).
                       Fig. 8.  T4ridimensioiial structure of the electric
                                or,-an of Sternarclius albifrons.
                                              13

                                                   C,
                  Fig. 9. Mormyrus oxyrhyneus: Caudal cross-section.
                          Yhe@fou@r black sections are electric organs
                           (redrawn after Marcusen).
                                            14

            ftrtf clzl fie
                      Fig. 10. Semi-schematic representation of an
                                electroplate of Gnathonemus numenius.
                                Orientation antero-posterior.  (After
                                Th. Szabo - Report to the French
                                Academy of Sciences.)
                                pl = anterior fold
                                P = papilla9
                                           15

                                                          C7.
                         Fig. 11. Gnathonemus senegalensis. (Redrawn after
                                     Th. Szabo.) E          electric organs.
                                        h                                 I?
                                                              A
                       Fig. 12. Electroplate of Gnathonemus.                (Redr2awn after
                                    Th. Szabo.) A         anterior, P       posterior.
                                                      t-"Nfk 4 Sp 14,IRO?s
                                       14A I cuisri   Put4i      DELI closus
                        Fig. 13. Electroplates of some Mormyrids. (Redrawn
                                    after Th. Szabo.) n = nerve trunk.
        3                                                  16

             invertebrate, central and peripheral nerve tissue and in muscle.  Ti ie  role
             of the acetylcholine system in elementary processes is pictured in  Fig.  14.
             In the resting condition, -acetylcholine is in a bound and inactive form. (S)
             Excitation of the membrane., by current or other stimulus, leads to a dis-
             sociation of the complex, and acetylcholine is released.  The free ester
             acts upon a r2eceptor protein (R), and this action upon the receptor is es-
             sential for the change of ionic permeability, i. e., for the increased Na
             conductance and thus of a generation of bioelectric potentials. Acetylcholine,./'
             may act by changing the configuration of the receptor protein.
                    The complex between acetylcholine and the receptor  is  in  a  dynamic
             equilibrium with the free ester and the receptor.  The free 2ester is sus-
             ceptible to attack by acetyleholineesterase (E).  The enzymatic hydrolysis
             of acetylcholine will permit the receptor to return to its restina condition.
             Sodium conductance returns to its oriainal level.  Thus, the action of the
             enzyme leads to immediate recovery and ends the cycle of the elementary
             process.  The high speed of the inactivation process makes possible rapid
             restoration of the membrane and2 permits the nerve to respond to the next
             stimulus in a millisecond or less. . The further recovery leads to the re-
             synthesis of acetylcholine in its bound form by clioline acetylase and the
             other components of the acetylating system.   The evidence supports the
             view that acetylcholine is the "specific operating substance" in the elementary
             process of conduction of nerve impulse, as Meyerhoff      applied it to the
             ro2le of ATP in muscular contraction.
                    Durinc, the past twenty years, much pertinent information has been
             obtained by the analysis of the molecular forces actina, in the proteins of
                                                                   tp.
             the acetycholine system. In several instances., it was possible to  establish
             relationships between the reactions of the protein solution and the function
        2                                       17

                                         .Et67KfMTAkY PJLDCClr
                                             O-
                                                                           @@AIIAF
                                                                         3*AT?       P)I*avD CRRATIIIC
                                                         2    fE.                  AT?
                                                                (a A+ Ac-TATr    Poe L
                                                                                            IA-
                                                                                AMP+PP
                                      Fig. 14.       Sequence of energy transformation
                                                     associated 2with conduction and in-
                                                     tegration of the acetylcholine system
                                                     into the metabolic pathnvays.  (Re-
                                                     dra-ivn after- Nachmans ohn (10).
                                                     S = bound acetylcholine
                                                     R = receptor protein
8                                                                     18

          of the intact cell. In some cases., such relationships were found to parallel
          those of specific el@ctrical events. A molecule such as acetylcholine has
          only a limited number of possibilities of reacting with a protein; the molecular
          forces acting between the small molecule and the macromolecules of the
          system must, therefore., be similar.  Relatively small modifications in the
          surface of the protein may lead to important changes in2 function. Idornia-
          tion obtained by the analysis of molecular forces in one protein will, there-
          fore, provide valuable information for an understanding of the reactions
          with other proteins. Acetylcholineesterase is for many reasons the most
          suitable protein of the system for studying the molecular forces in the active
          surface.
                 Analysis of the molecular forces acting in the active surface of the
          enzyme has revealed th2at the surface has two functionally and spatially
          separated subsites: an "anionic" site and an "eseratic" site.  The anionic
          site attracts the cationic groups of the substrate by Coulombic and Van der
          Waal's forces.  The esteratic site has an acidic and a basic or nucleophylic
          group symbolized by H and G.  The nucleophylic group forms a covalent
          bond with the electrophilic carbon of -the carbonyl group (see Fig. 15).
              2      e alcohol is eliminated from the enzyme substrate complex by an
          electronic shift and as a- result of the first phase, an acetylated enzyme is
          formed.  This reacts with H 0 to form acetate thus regenerating the enzyme.
                                      2                 %
          Experimental evidence in support of this mechanism is mentioned by
          Nachmansohn. (10)
                 Determination of the biochemical composition of fish has been made2
          by early investigators mostly on marine fish and the data has not been
                                                                    (12)
          derived from a statistical meaningful number. Vinouradov       points out
                                                              0
          that of the approximately 20, 000 knoivn species of fish, only 350 to 400 of
                                           19

                                                                                        ESTCRAriC SITE
                                                                                               I
                                                                               c H r c 14.x -  r,_
                                                                                                I
                              2                                            tki                 Chi
                                        Fig. 15.           Schematic presentation of the interaction
                                                           of the active groups in the surface of
                                                           acetylcholineesterase and the substrate.
                                                           (The Michaelis-Menten complex; redrawn
                  8                                         after Nachmangohn(10).)
                                                                                     20

          of them have been submitted to chemical analysis and the choice of species
          has usually been limited to those of commercial importance. Many analyses
          have been done on fish "as purchased" i. e. . after being caught -commercially
          and stored in ice for several days.  The composition can alter considerably
          under such conditions, either from chemical or bacterial action, or by leach-
          ing out of constituents by the meltin2g ice. Detailed analyses, as those of
          Sul-ama and Tokuhiro (13) on many organs of fish, are rare.
                 Complete analyses of the' biochemical composition of electric fishes
          have not been made.  Hasson and Chagas  (14) analyzed the interaction "in vitro"
          of macromolecules (proteins, polysaccharides, nucleic acids) with curare.
          Chromatographic analyses show the correlation between uronic acid concentra-
          tion and 2TRIEG (gallanine triethyliodide) binding. Also the analysis of a hydro-
          chloric acid hydrolisate gave glucose as the only reducing sugar component of
          Sf1(neutral polysaccharide).  The Sf3 (acid polysaccharide) dissolved in the
          acetate buffer being analyzed showed that glucoronic acid was the uronic
          acid constituent of Sf  Also acetylglucosanine choline esterase and oreinol
                              3'
          have been identified2. In general they described the quantitative results of
          the interaction of quaternary ammonium bases, viz. acetylcholine,,
          succinylcholine and TRIEG (gallanine triethiodide) with non dialyzable com-
          ponents of the aqueous extract of the electric organ of Electrophorus electricus.
                 Fahn Albers and Coval(l  5) investigated the catalyses of the hydro-
          lisis of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) in the presence'of Mg ++ I Na+, and
          by the microsomal fraction from the electric organ of the electric eel.,
          Electrophorus electricus.  The same preparation catalyses a Mg++-dependent
          transphospliorylation bet% veen ATP and ADP (adenosine diphosphate).  Both of
          these reactions are inhibited after treat.-.nent of the microsomes ivitli N-
          ethyl maleimide.  However, the addition of Na+ reactivates the transphos-
          phorilation, 8and the rate becomes more rapid than that of the original.  This
                                           21

             new Na+-sensitive exchange reaction is believed to be a component of the
             hydrolitic reaction.  J. P. Changeux et al. (16) studied the asymmetric re-
             partition of ACHE, (acetylcholinesterase) of each of the two facets of the
             electroplate.  They utilized acetylthiocholine as a substrate and isolated
             the ACHE by ultracentrifugation.  Cytochemical analysis of ACHE has been
             done and electronmi2crographs have been used in their study.  Gautron  (17)
             verified a similar study on the electric organ of the Torpedo.
             2.l. 5  Physioloay of the Electric Organs
                    The general physiology of the electric organs describing their common
             properties does not differ to much from other electrogenic tissues like nerves
             or muscles.  The nervous or muscular activity is accompanied by transitory
             electrical variations c2alled "action potentials. 11 Some analogies can be made
             between the electroplate electric activity and the electric activity of nerves
             or muscles.  Theories which apply to the cellular bioelectroc,,,enesis are also
             applicable to electric dischar-e of the electric organs. Since the electric
             discharge is a physical phenomena it could be related to the structures where
             it is produced or where it manifests its e2ffects. Two characteristics of
             electric organs should be taken into account: the electric conductivity and
             the electromotive force (EMF) of the electroplates.  The electroplates EMF
             does not exceed 0. 15 volts.  Fessard (18) calculated for the Torpedo marmorata
             the internal resistance to be between 7. 3 ohms and 24. 1 ohms.  He found the
             total EMF of the electric organ to be 64 volts; the short c2ircuit current B. 2 A.
             This data indicates that 400 electroplates are required in series to achieve
             this EMF.  The data cited above apply to the electric organ during discharge.
             Durino- rest the resistance is much higher.  The electric discharae is ac-
             companied by an increase in conductivity (or decrease in resistance).  The
             specific resistances at rest of the electroplates of Torpedo and Electrophorus
             is shown in Tab4le 1. (19)
                                              22

                                           B LE I
               Specific Resistance of I Centimeter Cube of Electric Tissue
                   Measured with the Aid of Nonpolarizable Electrodes
                      (Ag-AgCl) with a DC or an AC Current of Less
                   thanlOOHz.           ElectricOrganwasinaRestingState(19)
                                                     resistivity in ohms cm 2/cm
                                                   2Transversal         Lateral
           Lorpedo. small size                         1404               206
           Torpedo medium size                          760               260
           Electrophorus main organ                     318               106
           Electrophorus organ of Sachs                 146               105
                 The innervated posterior face of the electroplate of the organ of Sachs
                                                                2      2
           in Electrophorus electricus has a resistivity of 10 ohms/cm at rest.  The
           anterior face of the source electroplate has a resistance of 0. 23 oh=/cm2
           Pynes and Martins -Ferreira  (19)
                  The restine, and action potentials of the electric eel, the Torpedo sp.
           and Raja sp. are shown in Table 2 and compared with the resting and action
           potential of the muscular striate fiber of the frog. A schema2tic of the
           electric charges on the surface of an electroplate is shown in Fig. 16. In
           resting position the charges are equal, opposite and neutralize each other.
           In the active state, the posterior innervated face is subjected to an inversion
           and the two EMF are added in series.  The action potential seems to be pro-
           duced by an increase in ionic permeability of the innervated face of the
           electroplate.
                            9                23

                                         TABLE 2
                     Average Values of the EMF of Resting and Active
               Electroplates of Different Electric Fishes and Frog Muscle
                                    Resting          Action
            Electroplates of:       Potential       Potential          Reference
                                       mv              mv
          Electrophorus 0. of        73-86           126-150              19120
2             Sachs
          Electrophorus main          70               127                 19
             organ
          Torpedo                   (45)-70            115                 21
          Raja                        65                60                 22
          Muscular striate fiber      90               125                 23
             of the frog
                 The transverse electric resistance and DC potentials of the skin of
                           2                                                       (24)
         Torpedo marmorata have been measured by Radil-Weiss and Kovacevic.
         Their results are sumn-larized in Table 3 and the method is illustrated in
         Fig. 17.  The skin samples were taken from areas either covering the electric
         organ or from adjacent non-electrical regions. No significant differences
         were found between the dorsal or ventral sides of the body.  Body size has
         no influ6ence on the resistance value, but the electrical resistance of the skin
         covering the electric organ is lower than from other parts of the body. DC
         potential measurements show that the external surface of the skin is. slightly
         electropositive relative to the internal one.
                                           24

                                 +   +                  +         +
                                        so
                                        so
                       +  +      + -I+
                  Fig. 16. Electric charge distribution on the electroplate.
                            Left: resting state.  Right: active state at
                            maximum discharge.
                                         6   25

                                                                                           TABLE   3
                                                 Impedance and DC Potential of Skin Samples of the
                                                                  Electric Fish Torpedo marmorata
                        'T@vT)A of szin               S4in imt)ceanco (!2/cnl2)
                              lo tes,         2                                                                                                
DC
                                     ,cd              6--Urfa-ce--T        surfltee -              averaoo
                                                                                                                                               
potential
                                                                          2                                                                    
(MV)
                        Lso"al electric                                                            25.3     4.0
                        Ventral eleefrio                                                           n    -13          -NS
                                                                                                   37.6 -L  9.4
                        2                                                                           n = iF         I
                        !)O-q.-tl + ventral           31.3  =1  4.6        29.0 + 4.2              35.4     4.4                                
2 3 + 1.5
                          e:cctric                    n - 22               n = 22                  n    -                                     
1 %
            2            I)or--al non-electric                                                      ot   2-L- 15 3                     5%      
i3 =@-13
                                                                                                   n
                        Vc!itral non-electric                                                              4;.O      NS      1%                
2  NS
                                                                                                   n    7         1
                        Do-%al + -ven' ral            109.S 4- 17.1        113.5   +-   21.5       111.6   20.2                                
1.8 @- 1.3
                          non-electric                n                          18                n = IS
              2          E;-n;'cances                  I                                                                                       
n - 10
                                                                  "\-s
                            -Ul valu
                                      es  e.,toreLN-sed  as  avera@e.  +  S.r,.  of  the   m
                        t te,                      3                                        ean,    n    number of measurements. SigniC'cance
comput@-d bv q','Jdca+,
                            . t. @.
                                 'S  non-signi2c--nt.
                           From Radel-Weiss and KoVacevic(24).
                                                                                                26

                                             (RI
                                       RI
                                             u
                                       SEX                asc
                                                     UTRI)
                                                 oc
                      Fig. 17. Schematic representation of the impedance
                                measuring appa4ratus. GEN Generator, OSC
                                Tektronix oscilloscope, Rl known resistance,
                                R2 resistance of skin sample.(24)
                                             27

                                             t(2 1)
                        Grundfest and Benne       examined the physiology of the marine
                electric fishes:  Astroscopus,  Torpedo,  Narcine  and  Raja  (Raja  clan@l,
                Raja ocellata and Raja erinacea).  They examined innervation., excitability
                and some pharmacological properties of these marine electric fish electro-
                plates.  The.Torpedo el2ectroplates did not respond to electrical simulation
                but did to chemical stimulation. (25) The electric organ of Electrophorus
                electricus has two excitable systems; one direct and one i
                The electroplate of the main electric organ continues to respond to directly
                applied electric currents after it fails to respond to indirect, electrochemical
                neural stimuli.
                                     (31)
                  2     Keynes et al.     studied the morphology and electrophysiology of
                the electric organ of Malapterurus electricus, the African fresh-water
                electric catfish.  Majapterurus is an exception to the Pauni's law, accord-
                ing to which the innervated faces of the electroplates become negative dur-
                ing discharge, whatever the anatomical orientation of the organ.  This law
                holds for all other electric fishes.  Until Johne l2s(32) studied the  electric
                catfish and found out that their electric organ  developed  from  myoblasts,
                the general consensus was that it had a glandular origin.
                                             t(3
                       Bennett and Grundfes   3) also investigated the morphology and
                electrophysiology in Mormyridae which family includes 11 genera and prob-
                ably several hundred  species.  They  used  on2ly  a  few  species:  Mormyrus
                rume, Gnathonemus compressirostris, Gnath6nemus petersi . Gnathonemus
                moori and Gnathonemus tamadua.  The variety in form and signs of the
                pulses indicate structural and functional properties of the electroplates pecu-
                liar to the different forms. The  electric  organ  discharges  are  composed
                of potentials contributed by the stalks that emerge from the7 caudal surface
                of each electroplate as well as of the responses of both major faces.  The
                                                   28

             stalks and both major surfaces are electrically excitable and generate spikes.
             The normally evoked discharges of the electroplates originate by synaptic
             excitation of the stalk, to which the innervation is applied at one locus in
             Gnathonemus or at a number of loci in Mormvrus rume.  The stalk system
             serve to distribute excitation to the electroplate body so that the  whole  sur-
             face of the latter disc2harges nearly synchronously.
                    It is important to mention something  about  the  thermal  events  during
             and after the discharge of strong electric fishes.  We measured  in our
             previous investigations, the electric output of electric eels and electric  cat-
             fishes.  One of the electric eels (6 R length) could discharge bursts of im-
             pulses of over 80 watts peak power and, one of the electric catfishes could
             disch2arge over 30  watts  peak  power.    Obviously some of the energy was
                                                               (34)
             dissipated in heat. Aubert, Fessard and Keynes        studied the thermal events
             accompanying the electric discharges of the electric eel and the Torpedo. They
             could distinguish three phases: the phase Q 1 following  immediately  after  the
             electric discharge., marked by a rapid rise in temperature, fol2lowed by phase
             Q - marked by a slow decreasing phase which resulted in a temperature below
              2
             its initial level.  The phase Q3 starts with a slow temperature rise and staying
             there for a few minutes at its highest level before returning to its initial tem-
             perature level. This  latest  phase  Q3is conditioned by the external  load  and
             the amount of stimulation. It is also subject to fatiome and is  highly 2 ambient
             temperature-dependent.
                    There are some difficulties in interpreting the heat measurements
             in the case of the heat production durino, the electric discharge of the
                                                     t3.
             electric organ.  Bernstein and. Tschermak   (3 5) estimated the specific heat
                                                                       0
             for the whole organ of Torp1edo to be 0. 86 cal per g per  C. If it is ac -
             cepted that for a full grown TorDedo nobiliana the electric organs could
                                                 29

             weigli a few hundred kilograms, there is an appreciable amount of calories
                                                                ,,r
             dissipated.  For example: for every hundred Icilor, ams of electric organt
             86Y 000 calories would be dissipated per 0C-  Some  major  ambiguities   exist
             such as the nonther=l Q, phase of Electrophorus,, wfdcli is  followed  by  the
  2           cooling Q2 phase and the slow heating phase Q  3'  The Joule effect and heat
             propagation have not been studied, and there is a Possible interference of
             these factors with the results of the estimated specific heat for the electric
             organ.
                    The activity of the electric organ and its discharges are  cephalically
             controlled.  The electroplates are in a parallel series and are well synchronized
             and delays a2ssure a fast rising time of the impulse. Albe-tessard and Martins-
             Ferreira (36) investioated the role of the nervous comniand system in the
             functional synchronization of the electroplates of Electrophorus electrir-us.
             The electric organ is controlled by a nucleus of cells in the medulla, activated
             by a synchronous volley from a still unidentified higher level in the bra'm%
                    It seems that the 2frequency of discharge of the electric signal of electric
             fishes is a quantifiable behavioral variable.
             2.2    ELECTRORECEPTORS AN-D ELECTRORECEPTION
                    Some marine and fresh water fishes are sensitive to weak electric
             currents or slight changes or discontinuities in an electromagnetic field.
             Most species bavina this property are also electric fish, but since the term
             of electric fish is reserved for species w1hich produce electric discharges
             there are some nonelectric fishes which have electroreceptors but no electric
             transmitting organs.  The fresh water catfishes Kryptopterus ameiurus
             nebulosus and clarias and many sharks like the dogfish  Scyliorhinus  canicula
             and the lemon shark Negaprion brevirostris have electroreceptors.
                                                 30

                   Only electric fishes having a complex array of different kinds of
           electroreceptors can discriminate the different stimuli affecting the electro-
           magnetic field surrounding the fish (generated or not by its own electric
                   (4; 3 -3 9ii 40 -44)
           organ).                   Electroreceptors are part of the "lateralis line"
           system in fish.  The electrosensory system of fish can be active,, pass2ive
           or both, depending on whether the fish have or does not have an electric
           transmitting organ and if the electroreceptors are or are not autorhythmic.
                   The electrosensory systems have extraordinary sensitivies: thres-
                                                                                (4 @ 45y 46)
           holds of 0. 0 1 p V/cm have been reported in behavior experiments   .
                   Elect2roreceptors are located along most of the body.  Usually electro-
           receptors are more numerous on the head than on the rest of the body.
           Electroreceptors can be classified by their physiological or behavioral
           characteristics.  We have mentioned previously that from the physioloaical
           vieivpoint electroreceptors can be classified as:
                   a.  Synchronous
                   b.  Non-synchronous;
           or:
                   c.  Phas7ic (not to be confused with phase indicators),
                   d.   Tonic;
           or:
                   e.  Ampullary type
                   f.   Tuberous type.
                                             31

              From the behavioral viewpoint the electroreceptors can be classified as
              indicating:
                      a.   Movement
                      b.   Direction
                      c.   Conductivity
                      d.   Acceleration
                      e.   Phase of an electric signal
                      f.   Frequency of an electric signal, and
                      g.   Amplitude of an electric signal.
              2.2. 1  Distributio2n of the Electrosensory -Receptors
                      The electroreceptors sensory fields of Gnathonemus petersii(181       191)
              can be  clearly visualized if we put the fish in a solution of 1001o buffered
              formaline. Figures 20 and  21  show  the  limits  of  these  sensory  fields.
                      There are between 700 and 1000 tuberous organ electroreceptors,
              between 800 and 1000 2type A mormyromasts electroreceptors and between
              2100 and 2300 type B mormyromasts electroreceptors in the skin of an adult
              Gnathonemus petersii.   (47) The total number of electroreceptors varies be-
              tween 3600 and 4300.  These are distributed on the body as follows: between
              42 to 467o on the head on 41 to 449o' of the electroreceptor fields; between
              30 and 329o' on the dorsal sides on 27 to 30% of the electror2eceptor fields;
              and between 22 and 26% on the ventral sides on 25 to 329o'  of  the  electro-
              receptor fields.  The total area of the electroreceptor fields may occupy
              between 2000 and 5000 mm    2 area for fishes between 90 and 125 mm length.
              Figure 22 shows the different types of mormyromast electroreceptors of
              Gnathonemus petersii.
                     With the exception of the sensory receptors  of  the  chin  2which  are
              mechanical displacement receptors and are connected to the CNS through
                                                 32

                            Fig. 18. African fresh water weakly electric
                                     fish Gnathonemus petersii.
                                                   t
                       Fig. 19. Electric fish Gnathonemus petersii in a lucite
                                restraining tray provided witli stainless steel
                                electrodes.
                                               1  33

                                                                    DoXiAL
                                               ,Fye Ficii)
                                            Nor,
                                               r
                                         ailm
                                                  Fig. 20. The electric sensory fields of
                                                          5        Gnathonemus petersii.
                                        Fig. .21. Limits of the electroreceptors sensory
                                                        fields of Gnathonemus petersii.
                                                                             34

                                              b
                         Fig. 22. Different types of morm'yromasts:
                                  a. tuberous organ
                                  b. A-inormyromast
                                  c. B-mormyromast
                                  (top and cut vienv).
                                            35

            the nervus  trigeminus,  the  mormyromast  electroreceptors  are  subserved
            by the lateral line nerves. Figure 23 shows the main branches of  the  lat-
            eralis nervous system. All the  mormyromasts  types  (tuberous,  A  and  B)
            are connected to nerves forming bundles pertaining to the lateral line sys-
            tem and endin(r in the brain. Figure 24 shows an  electronmicrograph  of  a
            mormyromast type I2I.
                   The tuberous organ electroreceptors are  autorhythmic  and  the
            EMF may reach a few millivolts.  The repetition rate varies from 550
            to 3 900 with the most often encountered repetition rate between 9 50 and
            19 50 Hz.
                   Figure 25 shows a comparison between sensitivity and density of
            the electroreceptors in the epidermis of Gnathonemus petersii and Fig. 26
            shows the authorhytmic activity 2of the electroreceptors near the chin and
            near the eye.
            2. 2. 2  Tonic and Phasic E lectroreceptors
                   Figure 28, Fig. 31a and 33 b show ampullary tonic electroreceptors.
                                                                               (37)
            They resemble to the Lorenzini ampulla, a multisensory receptor.
            Dotterweich (48) mentioned twenty five morphologically different types of
   2         Lorenzini ampulla. It seems that depending on function and species of
            fish there is a large variation of this type of sensory receptor.  One of
            the differentiatina characteristics of the ampuuary sensory  receptors
            is the number of receptor cells which are embedded in the wall of  the
            ampulla.  Only a small part of their circumference is exposed to the
            lumen, althouah the surface in this regionImay be increased by micro-
      5      Vill,. (49, 50, 51, 52) They are innervated by sincle erfferent fibers  on
                                                           t>
            their inner surface and are surrounded by supportincr cells.  The response'
            of a tonic ampullary receptor is sliown in Fig. 29.  The ampullary electro-
                                              36

                                               IV.YAGUJ  RAMU S boa; V. LAr. kmor. Jplv4L CoAb
                                    CCAE
                                  TEU
                                                                                                                  IC.
                                               GtiLs
                       Fig. 23.... The lateral line nerves of the electric fish Gnathonemus petersii.
                                  (Redrawn after Harder(47).)

                Fig. 24. Electromicrograph:
                          a.  Transverse cut of Gnathonemus epithelium: mormyroniast
                              type I[ with sensory cells A and B-. Helly's fixative; stain-
                              ing: Azam
                         b.   Higher magnification of the A and B tpe cells. Arrows
                              indicate synaptic zones; c: fibrous capsule; staining:
            8                  phosphotungstic acid.
                         (after: Barets and Szabo (49)).
                                                 38

                             IE
                                                  Jell
                            44
                             0
                            Fig. 250  Comparison between sensitivity and density
                                      of the electroreceptors of Gnathonemus
                                      petersii in the epidermis (dfter H-a-r-cre-r (47)).
                        2                  aVAA&@&
                                          b
                                          4
                                          C Vw%w
                        Fig. 26.  Autor4ytmic activity of the electroreceptors
                                  of Gnathonemus petersii:
                                  a.  500 Hz calibration sicqial
                                  b.  electro0receptors near the chin
                                  c.  electroreceptors near the eye
                                  (after Harder(47)).
                                                   39

                      a  .......................
                                             ..............................................................................................
                      b
                      c
                      a ....................................
                                                                ............... ............................... ...........2.........
                     b
                     c
                             Fig. 2 7.  Electric activity from the nervus lateral anterior innervating
                                        receptor near the proboscis of a mechanical displacement on
                                        the chin of Giiathonemus petersii when the proboscis has been
                                        moved upwa
                                        a.  time marks = 50 Hz
                    6                    b.  electric activity in the nerve
                                        c.  movement of the chin proboscis

                                                                   fie A
                                                                    &7
                                         St CEET TOA
                                           CCU$
                                                                        Ciiii   I I llfi!lllllll
                                   nic electrorecept        Fig. 29.  Stimulus an2d recordii-i- from
                23.  Ampullai-y to                    or.                                      0
                        (Schematic)                            an ampullary tonic electroreceptor.
                                  p*Aoui MAIS                                              A
                                       c eas
            Fi,,. 30., Tul-jerous ph,,tsic clect5rorcceptor.  Fier. 3 1. StiiiLulus -,ind recorcliiig froii-L a
                         (Selieni.,itic)                        tuberous pliasic clectrorceeptor.
                                                        41

                                                     ,ate.-- ikl@
                                                       m6
                                                                              rob
                                               41
                               Fig. 32.    Electroreceptors of G
                                                                 _Vrn iarchus niloticus.
 2                      a: ampullary electroreceptor           b: tuberous electroreceptor type b
                       c: tuberous electroreceptor type c.  (Schematic)
                                                     42

                                                    sip-
                                  RECEPTOR CELLS    N-z HERVE FI&EV@,
                              E:EPITHE-LIAL TISSUE LELUMEII
                              F--FLATTEIJED LE.LLS
                    Fig. 33.   Phasic electroreceptor, South American fresh
                           5    water weak electric fish (after Szamier and
                               Wachtel(51)).
                                                   43

               of a tonic ampullary receptor is shown  in  Fig.  29.  The  ampullary  electro-
               receptors are connected to the exterior by an obvious canal filled with a
               polymucosaccharide jelly.  There is evidence that different kinds of am-
               pullary sensory receptors (electroreceptors, mechanoreceptors, temperature
               receptors) may have biochemically different jellies in the canals. (41)
                      Anat2omically and functionally the phasic electroreceptors are dif-
               ferent from the tonic receptors.  No obvious canal connects the lumen of
               the phasic electroreceptors to the exterior. A plug of loosely packed epi-
               thelial cells are interposed between the receptor and the superficial layer
               of the epidermis.  Phasic electroreceptors are shown in Figs. 24, 30, 32b
               and c, 33, 34c, d and e. and 35.  Phasic2 electroreceptors are sensitive to
               higher frequency stimuli than the tonic types.  The phasic electroreceptors
               behave as if a capacitor was interposed between the cell proper and the ex-
               terior of the fish.  Three properties derived from the fact that there is a
               capacitance between the cell and the exterior can be ascribed to the phasic
               electroreceptors: (1) equivalence of onset and termiri@-tion of long2-lastino,
               stimuli of opposite polarity; (2) absence of excitability change during  maint-
               ained stimuli; and (3) absence of -net current flow during externally  recorded
               responses. (53)
               2.2.3  The Control and Function of the Electroreceptors
                      We mentioned that the qlectroreceptors are part of the lateral line
               system in fish.  The functional characteristics of six d2ifferent kinds of lateral
               line organs have been  considered:  canal  neuromasts,  free  neuromasts.,  am-
               pullary electroreceptors, ampullary displacement receptors, mormyromasts
               and bulbar organs. Some 'of the organs are autoactive, others  are  only  acti-
               vated by the electric discharges of the transmitting organ.  From the six
               different lateral line organs mentioned, three types are electric and thre7e
                                                 44

                                                  ............
                                                                      d
                                                                   gx
                                                                      C
                                                                                                                              t
                                                                   3
      2                                                                b
                       SC
                                                                               n           b.m.
             b.nL                      43
                                     SC  Mc
                                                                                            SC
                                                         SC
                                                       2            0
                                                                   0
                                                                                 C
                       Fig. 34.  Schematic drawings of ordinary and specialized lateral
                                 -line organs of gymnotids (after Th. Szabo).
                                 A.  Schematic drawing of "ordinary" lateral-line organ.
                                 B.  Organ type I (ampull5ary organ).
                                 C. Organ type IIA (tuberous organ) (Hypopom-u-s-,)-
                                 D. Another type (IIB) of tuberous organ (ilypopomus).
                                 E.  Tuberous organ type IIC (Electrophorus).

                         Fig. 35.  Tuberous organ (electroreceptor) of
                                   Gnathonemus petersii.
                                               4(3

       types are mechanic;xl receptors. It seems that the fish  utilize  the  electrical
       receptors for communication  and  object  recognition  and  the  mechanical  re-
       ceptors for swimming and for proximity feeding.
               There is a correlation between the electrical and the mechanical
       stimuli and a differentiation at the higher  nervous  levels.  The  investigation
       of the roles of the different receptors in mormyrids for object detection,
       locati2on and identification, may help to elucidate their function.
               Hagiwara,  Szabo   and   Enger (54) studied the effect of local conductivity
       of the external environment of the electric fish Sternarchus  albifrons  on  its
       electroreceptors.  They found that the information about the local conductivity
       is transmitted through the sensory nerve fibers innervating the electroreceptors
       to the higher nervous centers.  Sternarchus albifrons has a high frequency2
       electric organ discharge (650-1000 Hz).  "The impulse frequency of the
       electroreceptor nerve fiber increases when the control  edge  of  a  metal  plate
       (conductive object) or the control edge of a plastic plate (nonconductive object)
       is above the receptor of the fiber.  ,(54) (Fig. 36)
               Both phasic and tonic electroredeptor response is determined first
       by the rate of change of the current intensity and second by the intensity of
   2    the current. Movement of the  object  affects  the  phasic  electroreceptors.  If
       a constant-voltage pulse field is applied between the head and the tail  of  the
       fish the increasing or decreasing of the signal rate in the nerve fiber  of  the
       electroreceptor is conditioned by the  polarity  of  the  stimulus.  Synchroniza-
       tion of the electroreceptor nerve fiber frequency and the frequency of the
       electric organ of Sternarchus albifrons exists only at a high inte0nsity  of  the
       field potential.
               Szabo and Fessard   (39) investigated the electroreceptors in mormyrids
       and Belbenoit(") studied the ability to locate objects by similar fish species.
                                            47

                                            A                                       B
                        200
                       /SEC
                                                                500                      Metal plate
                        loo  -                                                          Plastic plate
                                                                400 - I
                                          2                                      2
                   iAZ  300  -
                                                                300 -
                   to
                        200  -                                  200 -
                        loo -                                   loo
                                              L
                             0   5     10    15   20     25         0         1         2 2        3
                         POSITION   OF THE ROSTRAL EDGE            DISTANCE FROM THE LATERAL
                                OF  THE PLATE (cm)                     SURFACE OF THE FISH (cm)
                       Fig. 36.      A: relationship between the steady-state nerve
                                     impulse frequency and the position of the plate
                                     along the long axis of the fish; upper diagram for
                                     (4x22 cm) metal (dots) and plastic (circles) plates,
                                     lower diagram for a (6x2 cm) metal plate. Arrow
                                     indicates location of receptor. B: relationship
                                     between nerve impulse frequency and distance
                                     between plate and lateral surface of the fish.
                                     Curves 1. 29 3. were obtained with three different
            4                         positions of the plate along the long axis of the fish.
                                     (After Hagiwara, Szabo and Enoer

          They found that some electroreceptors have a continuous autorhythmic
          activity which could-surpass 2000 Hz.  This activity could be modulated by
          an alternating current present in the aquarium.  These electroreceptors
                                   (56)
         .are similar to the Franz      "tuberous organs.     They concluded  that  the
                                                                       ignals by vari-
          electroreceptive function c2onsists in encoding peripheral s
                                         d latency of the electroreceptor units and by
          ations in frequency; phase an
          changing the number and distribution of the activated or inactivated re -
           ceptors. A pacemaker seems     to control the autorhythmic activity  of  the
           receptors.
                  The author has performed simultaneous recordings from the electric
           transmittincr organ and from autorhythmic ampullary tonic e2lectroreceptors
           of Sternarchus albifrons (see Figs. 37a and b).  The transmitting organ was
           discharging at a rate of  approximately  680  cycles/sec;  the  autorhythmic
           activity discharged at a rate of approximately 900 cycles/see and an am-
           plitude of about 2 mV.
            2.2.4 Active ElectroreceE!im
                   Lissn-an and Machin(39) studied the behavior of Gvninarchus niloticus
            and2 concluded that the detection and location of objects by the fish is due to
            both the transmitting electric organ and the electroreceptor array. Any ob-
            ject that wcald come in the proximity of the fish would constitute  a  dis-
            continuity in the electromagnetic field generated by- the electric transmitting
            organ.  This discontinuity would  affect the electroreceptors.  The informa-
            tion transmitted by these electroreceptors to the highe9r nervous centers
            would determine the behavior of the fish.
                                          (38, appendix)
                    Lissman and Machin                  attempted to explain this phenomena.
             The authors suacrested that the fish is integratina the second derivative of the
                                                 49

                                                     Figurc 37a.,Rccordin,, from an
                                                                 d, curarizcd Stcrn,2@rch,,.s
                                                      anaestlictizc
                                                                 ecimcn. I-lorizontal:
                                                      II)ifrons Sp
                 2                                       graduation             ertical:
                                                                    1 mscc. V
                                                                    10 mv.
                                                     I  graduation
         Fic,ure 3'7b. I\Iicroelectrode recordin,,Or of
         the autorhythmic electrical activity of
                                2  troreceptors of
         the an-il)ullarS, tonic elec
         Stei-narcli  @ nll)ifrons. The spilzes seen
                                 C almost
         on the top of the rliythmi
                                  the electric
         sintisoidal wan,erorm are
         sic.nials from the electroreceptors.
         Horizontcil: 1 gradtiation = 2 msec.
         Vertical: 1 graduation = 8500 MV.
         Amplification xlOO, effective 1 gradua-
         tion  5 m V.  Spil@c app. 2 to 2. 5mv.

       the received signal and thereby increasing significantly the signal-to-noise
       ratio of the signal.
       2. 2. 5  Passive Electroreception
              Previous and actual investigations have shown that certain electric
       fishes cease transmission when objects which could represent a threat are
       brought in close proximity.  The fishes continue to react to the presence of
       these objects even after their transmissions have  ceased.  This  could  indi2cate
       that they are still able to detect the presence of these objects by usino- their
       electromagnetic sensor array in a passive mode.  There is evidence in the
                                                                xa               57)
       literature which tends to support this conclusion.  For e  mple   Bullock(
       recently mentioned that sharks, fresh-water catfish and electric fish use low
       or hic,                                                      2                (58)
            ,,,h frequency electroreceptors for passively detecting objects.  Kalmijn
       published an article on the electric sense of sharks which have no  transmittinc,
       electric organ.
                    (59)
              Szabo     denervated the transmittina electric organ of Gymnarchus
       niloticus and made it inactive. He recorded the autonomic  activity  of  electro-
       receptors in the skin (3-12 mV) at a frequency2 of 310 to 340 Hz.  The fish
       with the denervated transmitting electric organ will react normally  to  metallic
       objects brought close to it.  This result suggests that the electric organ dis-
       charge may not be essential for the localization of objects in close proximity
       to the fish.
                               (60)
              Szabo and Sakata      used curare to block the electric transmitting
       organ command-center in the brain and  found  that  the  3mesencephalic  potential
       depends on the impulses transmitted by the electroreceptor system  of  the  fish,
       and not on the rhythmic activity of the trans mittinaargan.
                       (46)
              Agalides     reported in 1963 to the  ONR  that  lemon  sharks,  Negaprion
       brevirostris, have very sensitive electi-oreceptors, but no  transmittin-  organ.
                                          51

               This evidence emphasizes the importance of the electrosensory
        array in the identification and location of objects.  Under certain conditions,
        the fish may not need a transmitting organ in order to navigate, detect, lo-
        cate and identify objects.  On the other hand, it has been demonstrated that
        if the electrosensor array is incapacitated, the fish cannot navigate correctly
                    (60)
        or find food.
        2.22.6  Coding of the Electrical SiTnal of Electric Fishes
                                       - - 1-1@
               Investigators of electric fishes proposed different kinds of coding
        schemes for their electric signals.  Lissman and Machin (38) proposed a
               1.  "Pulse-frequency-modulation" (like in Gymnarchus nilotic'us);
        Watanabe and Bullock 1(62) proposed a
               2.  "Pulse-phase modulatio2n" (like in Eigenmannia vireseens);
                           (61)
        Szabo and Hag3.,w-ara  analyzed and suggested three other kinds of codings:
               3.  "Number coding mechanism" (like in Hypopomus artedi).,
               4.  "Probability coding mechanism" (like in Sternarchus albifrons),
               5.  "Latency coding mechanism" (like in Gnathonemus petersii).
               According to the first hypothesis "Pulse9-frequency modulation" sen-
        sory information should be conveyed by the frequency of the sensory impulses
        dependent on the pulse of the electric discharges,
               The second hypothesis "Pulse-phase modulation" the sensory coding
        is the result of time relation (the phase) on the sensory impulse follo,.vin'T the
        electric orcran discharge.
                                          52

            The third hypothesis called the "Number coding mechanism" supposes
     that the intensity of the electric potential field is coded through a single electro-
     receptor fiber by the number of nerve impulses produced by each electric
     organ pulse.
            In the number four hypothesis, called "Probability coding mechanism.,
     the coding is provided by the probability that each electric organ impulse might
     initiate an impulse in the nerve fiber.
            Fina2lly the fifth hypothesis: "Latency coding mechanism" is explained
     by the fact that certain mormyrid electroreceptors permit a change in latency
     of the electric organ impulses related to the intensity of the  current  flowing
     through the receptor.  Therefore, the intensity of the potential field can be
     coded by the time relation between electric transmitting organ discharge and
     sensory impulse, the time ranaing being as much as 8 milliseconds.  For
     variations in the s-upertlireshold field intensity this would be the only  mech-
     anism for a sensory organ producincr single spikes.  The place where the
     latency-shift of the sensory impulse is taking place has not  as  yet  unquivoc-
     ally explained.
            It is worth mentioning that there are electroreceptors connected to
     nerve fibers which would not transmit any impulses without a specific stimulus.
     Other electroreceptors are related to  nerve  fibers  discharging  continuousl2y.
     Some., when presented with stimuli, increase their electric activity and
     others decrease it.
     2.3    EXPERIMENTAL FINDINGS
     2.3. 1  Methods
           Figures 38 and 39 show two African fresh water weakly electric fishes
    Figures 40 and 42 show two South-American fresh water weakly electric fishes.
    Figure 41 shows an African fresh water strong electric fish and Fig. 42 shows
    a South American fresh water stroner electric fish.
                        9                53

                Fig. 38. Gymnarchus niloticus.  African fresh water, weakly
                          electric fish.  45 cm long, weight: 600 g, land of
                          origin - Congo.  Repetition rate of the-signal: con-
                          stant medium rate     300 per second.
                 Fig. 39. Gnathonemus    petersii.  African fresh water, weakly
                          electric fish.  15 cm long, weight: 19 g6, land of
                          origin - Nigeria.  Repetition rate   of the signal: vari-
                          able low rate:  2 to 150 per second.
                                              54

                                                                 es,,-water
                                                       erica-li ir lit -
                                ,s cara.PO-  South           weig  . 180 g;
                                            -h 22 cla IO'laot
                                           i            tition rate 0, the
                           2                s
                       SY- -@@.O@i@ctric
                        ,v e zLt@l,-j electr3-c    pepe         150 per sel.
                        land of.oric-in - "razi"  rclte      to
                        signal'. variable rnedium
                                                                                   trong
                                                                        .,,-water S
                                                                    fres
                                                      us     AIric
                                                                             'Bursts of
                                           Lls electric          ht- 215 9-@
                     Fig. 41. lllqp
                                    0 @e_   'hi         2oo   volts
                                              is cra lontt
                               electric  iis
                                 to 15 pulses'. 150 t

                                                                   A"
         4tn
                     Fig. 42. Sternarchus albifrons. South American fresh vrater weakly electric fish,
                              17 cm long, weight: 32 g; land of origin - Brazil. Repetition rate of the
                              signal which Is constant with constant water temp.: 760 per see at 230C.

                 Figures 43 to 49 show the electric signal of five fresh water weakly
         electric fishes.
                 A corner of our laboratory with aquaria is shown in Fig. 50. In Fig.
         51 different restraining cages for the fish is shown. In Fig. 52 a self-built
         microelectrode amplifier is shown and in Fig. 53 the instrumentation used
         for recording and playing back the electric fishes electric sianals is shown.
         2. 3. 22  The Electromagnetic Field Generated by Sternarchus albifrons
                 T Soutli American FresE Water Weakly Electric Fish
                 The 12 foot diameter, 4 foot high fiberglass water tank fill-Bd with ap-
         proximately 1000 gallons of fresh water of pH 7. 1 has been used for the
         electromagnetic field measurements.
                 The water is heated by 2xlOOO watt heaters controlled by a IIYSI"
                 0
         to 0. 1 C temperature controller.  The water in the tank is normally held
              0
         at 25 C.  The heaters are in a separate 30 gallon (Iheater'l tank and are
         connected to a relay switching them on and off and controlled by the tem-
         perature controller.  Two 9 gallon per minute pumps circulate water from
         the large tank to the heater tank and return.
                 The silver-silver chloride-platinized-silver-chloride e2lectrodes are
         attached to rails of nylon string, allowing them to be moved from one end to
         the other end of the tank.  The electrodes are connected to a remote con-
         trolled differential amplifier (anipl. fact. x 4200) suspended over tha tank
         and from the amplifier to the oscilloscopes Tektronix type 555, or type 502
         with differential input.
                 An electric fish was suspended on one of the restraining devices shown
  3       in Fia. 70.  The fish restraining devices were provided with stainless steel
              Z>
         end-electrodes which were connected to an audioainplifier (ampl. fact. = 400)
                                            57

                                                                                                                       Wit
                                                                              n fresh water strong electric
                                                              South America                             -100
       co                                   rus  electricusv                   ran discharge about 70
                 2     Fig. 43.  FIectrophO'@              ic organs-. main org
                                                                     organ of Ilunter: 1-7 volts used for
                                                length of the fish;          and discharge of this organ
                                volts  per  f              hs: the purpose
                                            .I- organ of Sac
                                navigatiol  i
                                are not as Yet well established.

                    Fig. 44. Gnathonemus petersii train of impulses 1/10
                             sec per grad U. b V per grad.
                    Fig. 45. Gnathonemus pe#Lersii single impulse 200 micro-
                             seconas- ii5@'d I volt ad.

                                                 j
          Fig. 46.  Sternarchus albifrons electric signalg repetition rate: 760 per
                    see water emperature: 230CY amplitude: 10 mV grad,, sweep
                      0.P5 msec grad, carbon electrodes 8 inches apart.
                                  -V--t t7
                                      -4E
        1    Fig. 47.  Gymnarchus niloticus electric signal, repetition rate: 320 per
                                              240C, ampiitude: 5 inV grad, sweep:
                           water temperature:
                      see,
                                                                  part.
                      0. 5msee grad,  carbon electrodes 12 inches a
                                             60

                                                               'd U.
                                                            RIP
                                                ji
                                                             tition rate: 9. 5 per sec,
           -Fig. 48.                     lectric signaig repe   mV/grad sweep: .5
                                          240C, amplitude: 100   e2ss steel electrodes.
                                           lucite tray with stainl
                                                                      t
                                                                                 de: 100
                        Gymnotus caraipo electric sigmi, single spike, amplitu
              -Fig. 49.                           crosec/grad, special lucite tray witll
                     6        --      W'e(TD-: 500 mi
                         mv/gradt-S-Nvl  ,
                         stainless steel electrodes.
                                                 61

                           ----------
             'Fig. 50,  View of a corner in the electrophysiology laboratory R7ith the
                        aquaria for electric fish.
                                    IF
                                                                  caaes for the fish
               Fig. 51.  Different kinds of lucite restraining
                               5                      62

                                           lip
                                        ;.Tek
                                               0
                                               pport and amplifier_ Bottom.
                    Fio,. 52. Microelectrode  su
                              L
                                      r
                                                          mametic tape recorder
    2                        lifiers, oscilloscope and Revox       ical activity Of
             Fig. 53.  Amp                             k the electr
                        with Dolbi-filter) for playiig bac
                        electric fishes recorded on magnetic tape-
                                               63

                            7t     -N
                                  4z-
           Fig. 54.   Electrical activity of Sternarchus albifrons. Fish in lucite and
                      nylon fish line fixture; the pick-up electro7es were parallel with
                      the fish, distance: 40 cm, amplitude: 0. 2 V/grad, fish at 00,
                      amplifier amplification factor: x 4200.
            Fig. 55.  Electrical activity of Sternarchus albifrons. Same as Fig. 54
                      but the pick-up electrodes were parallel with the fish, amplitude:
                      0. 2 V/grad, fish at 22. 500
                                            64

              Fig. 56.  Electrical activity of Sternarchu@s albifrons.  Same as Fig. 54
                         but the pick-up electrodes we@re@pa-r-a-l-l@e-I w@ith the fish, amplitude:
                         0. 2 V/gr@d, fish at 450.
                Fig. 57.  Electrical activity of Sternarchus albifrons.  Same as Fig. 54
                           but the pick-up electro es were r)arailleel -@%wv-ilth the fish, amplitude:
                            100 mV/o-rad, fish at 67. 50.
                                                     65

            Fig. 58. Electrical activity of Sternarchus albifrons. Same as Fig. 54
                      but the pick-up electrodes ,vere parallel with the fish, amplitude:
                      50 mV/grad, fish at 900.
            Fig. 59.  Electrical activity of Sternarchus albifrons. Fish in luc'lte and
                      nylon fish line fixture, pick-up electroaeg-perpendicular to the
                    2  fish, distance: 40 cm,, fish at 00, amplitude: 100 mV/grad,
                      sweep: 1 msec, amplifier amplification factor: x 4200.
                                             66

              Fig. 60.  Electrical activity of Sternarchus albifrons. Fish in lucite and
                        nylon fish line fixture@@-up electrodes perpe
                                             ,, pick                   ndicular to the
                        fish, distance: 40 emi fish at 22. 50, amplitude: 100 mV/grad,
                        sweep: 1 msec, amplifier amplification factor: x 4200.
8
              Fig. 61,  Electrical activity of Sternarchus albifrons.  Fish in lucite and
                        nylon fish line fixture, pick-up electrodefperpendicular to the
                        fish, distance: 40 cm, fish at 450, amplitude: 100 mV/grad,
                        sweep: 1 msec, amplifier amplification factor: x 4200.
                                                67

                                        .n4
             Fig. 62.  Electrical activity of Sternarchus albifrons., Fish in lucite and
                        nylon fish line fixture, pick-ud electrodes perpendicular to the
                        fish, distance: 40 cm, fish at 900, amplitude : 100 mV/grad,
                        sweep: 1 msee, amplifier amplification factor: x 4200.
         3    Fig. 63.  Electrical activity of Sternarchus albifrons.  Fisb in lucite and
                        nylon fish line fixture, pick-up electroc7es perpendicular'to the
                        fish, distance: 40 cm, fish at 900 amplitude    100 mV/grad,
                        sweep: 1 msec, amplifier amplification factor: x 4200.
                                                68

                                                  RAILS                            RAILS
                                                        NILON L I)IC-
                                                             LUCITE' CONE
                                                           :14ARKt-q@  IDDLE OF771
    ,too                                                   0
                                 2                                   FISH                                                                
MPLIFIEP,
                                                      PA-RALL.rLPItK-M? ELECTRODE.
                                                                                                                    PERPEAfbl(ULA)Z
PI(X-UPEL&MOPef
                                                            F169EP,6LAgS TAMK
                                 qo,
     To IROF DIFF@AMPLIFIEP,
                                                                   KA ILS
                                                                                     th a fish positioned in
                         Fig.  64. Diagram of the fiberglass water tank wi
                                     the middle of the tank and pick-up electrodes.

        CD En
          (D0
           CD
           C-t.
           En
          (D (D
          U)
          P(D
           CD

                                -4     220'                                                                  F I
                                                                                                                   XC    tj
                                                                                                                                     AL
                                       230'
                                                 2                                                     @7
                                --4    240'
                                                                                                                                               
iin,
                                       250
                                       tio
                                                                                                        2                                      
icn.
                                       260'
                                       27Cr
                                       90
                                       2--3
                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                2                                              
.51
                                       310'
                                       50,
                                                                              To  !Ck@-TICAL   @@136 @A L;
                                                                                       ti p
                                       320,
2
                                                                                                                       77@
                                                                                                                          lo-
                                                                        20,               to,                             3W'             3 40@
                                                      I TT,-,  2     r     I .7T=. -[-i-t7           -n                1-71 f
                             Fig. 66. Electroniagnetic field-pattern of the freshwater weakly electric
                                                 fish Sternarchus albifrons. Pick-up electrodes perpendicular
                                                 to the field.
                                                                                                   71

                                                                                                                                               
HILLI"L.TJ  AT   Tifil  picle-up                  ItL4'C'rADbC$  IAJ4PL-IF$eP  OOO)T
                                                                                                                               ik
              2                                                                                                                 p       I      
o a                                                                                           CO,
                                                                                                                                         7- -7
                                                                                                                     2                         
iiit
                                                                                                                                               
Tl'
                                     2          CD
                                               ,.t.  M      CD
                                         CD
                                         CD    n     CD
                                               0--   CD
                                         C)
                                                                                                                                               
2          t-J-
                                                            cn
                                               CD                              J.
                                         CD
                                               txj
                                                     (D
                                  II-    W                                                I     i. i.:  i,!:           :      .         2      
.   -      -   I        . I   .. ,     .                   , .   il,  i;           .      .  .,[  ,  .    I.I
                                                     En
                                  CD     C:)   (D
                                               0
                                  0
                                  C+
                                         CD                 En
   2                                                  tn
                                  pcl    fn
                                  0      0
                                  (D     CD
                                                            (D
                                         (D
                                                     CD
                                               p
                                                     I---   CD
 2                                                    En     (')         %          .      .   ; I : '      .                                  
:   .
                                         CO                                        6.1
                                                                                                                                               
E     4       6s rAN           WIA.
         2                                CD
                                         o     o
                                                            cn
                                         p     0
                                                     CD     00
                                                                                                                                               
2                                                                               r
                                               CL
                                                     0      ('D
                                         CD    0     :3,
                                         (D    ::$   CD                                                         ....  ..
                                                     4r+
                           9              0           CD     e+
                                         0,          0

              Fig. 68.  Permanent magnet (500 g) wrapped in polyethylene foil.  It
                         was submerged in the water to assess the ability of electric
                         fish to detect magnetic fields.
                                                       i,7
              Fig. 69.  Different objects (cylinders of n@etal) used to test the ability
                        6f electric fish to detect them. A lucite cylinder (not shown)
                        was also used.,
                                                 73

                  70. Electric fish in lucite tube with holes and stainless steel end
                      electrodes in the large fiberglass tank used to establish the
                      threshold of  detection of different objects (before lowering
                      the tube in the -water).
                                                74

                 and to an oscilloscope. During the measurement@, of the electromagnetic
                 field generated by Sternarcilus albifrons, the -fish was confined in the fixture
                 of lucite and nylon fish line with an open area of 827o.  The fixture was free
                 of conducting materials.
                       The fish in the restraining fixture was located in the middle of the tank
                 and could be rotated 18002.  The center of the tank was constantly fixed using a
                 lucite plumb bob suspended from the ceiling (Figs. 70 and 71). Measurements
                 were repeated at 001 22. 502 450 67. 50 $ 900$ 112. 50 $ 1350 157. 50 and 1800
                 of rotation. All measurements were replicated five times.  The fish was sub-
                 merged to a 10 cm depth.  The fish's own signal was too weak to take m2ea-
                 surements at distances over 40 cm from the fish.  Therefore, the discharge
                 of the fish was amplified by an audioamplifier 400 x and fed into the tank by
                 means of silver-silver chloride electrodes about 12 cm apart (equal to the
                 length of the fish).
                        The fish could discharge a signal of about 22 mV at a repetition rate
                 of 720.  The resistance of the water was around 900 ohms between ele2ctrodes
                 (12 cm distance). We amplified the fishes original signal to 7 volts when we
                 recorded from the electrodes.- In this way, we improved the signal-to-noise
                 ratio by a factor of 7/.002 or 350.
                        Measurements were made with the electrodes parallel and perpendicula,
                 to the electromagnetic field of the fish. Data was plotted on graph paper.  Phu.
                 were taken with the oscil2loscope camera.  Figures 54 to 57 show the signal
                 picked up by the silver-silver chloride-platinized-silver-chloride electrodes
                 when parallel to the electromagnetic field.  These oscilloscope data show the
                 signals amplified x 4200.  The smallest readable value was around 6 microvolt
                 at the origin.  The noise level was very low considering that the tank is in an
                 open area and the room was not shielded.
    2                                                 75

              Fig. 71. Fish in a restraining cage submerged in the large tank, the
                       lucite cone indicates the middle of the tank. Arrow indicates
                       an object moved in the direction of the fish.
                                                 76

                   Figures 59 to 63 show the signal picked up by the electrodes being per-
           pendicular to the electromagnetic field of the fish. All these measurements
           were taken with the pick-up electrodes at 40 cm distance  from  the  fish.  The
           fish was rotated from 0 0 to 900 making measurements at 0   0i 22. 50y 450t 67. 50
                   0
           and 90  . Figure 64 shows a diagram of the fiber2glass tank including positions
           of the fish and of the pick-up electrodes.  Figure 65 and 66 shows the electro-
           magnetic field of Sternarchus albifrons plotted and compared with the normalized
           theoretical cosinus curve of a dipole, for pick-up electrodes parallel to the
           electromagnetic field.
                   Figure 67 shows the EMF values for different distances from the
           center of the tank.
                   The fish had to be restrained from mo2ving  during  the  electromagnetic
           field measurements, so as not to chance the dipole direction.  We experi-
           mented and checked different fixtures like: tubes with holes, lucite  endplates
           and rods and lucite endplates and nylon fish line. They are shown in  Fig.  51.
           The tube had 207o open surface., the lucite endplates and rods about 407o open
           surface and the lucite endplates and nylon fish line 82% open surface.2
           2. 4    BEHAVIOR EXPERIMENTS FILMED ON STANDARD 8 FILM
           2. 4. 1 Experiments Needed to Assess Sensitivity, Range and Effectiveness
                   of the Electric Fishes to Detect Objects and  Communicate  Under-N@a7er
                   We considered it necessary to perform a number of experiments de-
           signed to quantify some of the electric fish properties.  Four different species
           of electric fishes have been considered for these e2xperiments because of their
           basically different systems used as transmitters and electroreceptors.  These
           fishes are:
                                              77

                     a.  Gy=arclius niloticus
                         An African weakly fresh-water electric fish with a medium fixed
               frequency (260 to 300 Hz) and a composite waveform.  Frequency does not
               change with temperature. It has about seven kinds of electroreceptors plus
               displacement, acoustic and chemical sensors located on or near the skin.
               Electroreceptors are located on the whole body but are more numerous near
     2          and on the head and near its very pointed tail. Countries of origin are Sudan.,
               Nigeria and Ivory Coast and the two Concros of Africa. It can grow to a maxi-
               mum size of 5 feet and has a life span of about 40 years.
                          The electric organ is located caudally occupying about 1/2 to 2/3's
               of the fish length.  Electric organ is derived from modified muscle spindels.
               Difficult to obtain and to keep a2live. Has strange parasitic diseases affecting
               the spinal cord.  The fish is practically blind and has only vestigial eyes.
                     b.  Sternarchus albifrons
                     A South-American weakly fresh water electric fish with a high, re-
               latively fixed frequency (700-800 kHz) and a composite waveform.  The rate
               of discharge is temperature dep -endent at a rate of between 40 to 60 Hz per
               degree centigrade. Has at2 least three kinds of electroreceptors plus dis-
               placement, acoustic and chemical sensors located on or near the skin.
               Electroreceptors are located on the whole body and preferentially on or
               around the head.  Countries of origin: Brazil, Columbia, Venezuela, Guianas,
               Argentina, Bolivia, Ecuador, Peru in South-America and some parts of
               Central America.  Can grow to a maximum size of one foot.  Life span is
             0  at least 10 years.
                      The electric organ is located caudally occupying about 2/3 Is of the
               fish's body length.  The electric organ is derived from modified nervous
               tissue. It is a hardy species, easy to maintain and easy to procure.  This
               fish is also practically blind and has vestigial eyes.
                                                 78

                     c.  Gymnotus carapo
                     A South American weakly fresh water electric fish with a medium to
             low variable frequency (30 to 150 Hz) and a composite waveform.  Has multiple
             electro and sensory receptors located on or near the skin. Electroreceptors
             are located on the whole body and preferentially on or near the head. Countries
             of origin same as for Sternarchus albifrons. Can grow to a maxim2um size of
             on.e and a half feet.  Life span is several years.
                     The electric organ is located caudally occupying about 1/2 of the fish's
             body length.  The electric organ is derived from modified muscle spindels.
             It is a hardy species but is not as easy to procure as Sternarchus.
                     d.  Gnathonemus petersii
                     An African weakly fresh water electric fish with a low variable pulse-
             2form repetition rate signal (5 to 170 pps). Has multiple ampullary and tub-
             ,erous electroreceptors and sensory receptors located on the body and pre-
             ferentially m or hear the head. Countries of origin located in the subtropica4
             tropical and equatorial Africa.  Can grow to a maximum size of one foot.  Life
             span may be several years.
                     The electric organ is located in the tail and is de2rived from modified
             muscle tissue. It is relatively easy to procure, but is very difficult to maintain
             it for longer periods of time in captivity.
                     For all experiments we used a fiberglass water tank of 12 foot diameter
             and 4 foot height.
                     Experiment #1
                     This experiment was designed to assess the capability of electric fishes
             to use their navigation system to avoid obstacles like fine nyl4on thread. We
             used fishes of the species m@ntioned under (a) and (b).  Gymnarchus niloticus
                                               79

            is an air breather and cannot be confined in a tube but it can be used in ex-
            periments with free swimming fishes.  This fish was put in the tank at the
            point "All (see Fig. 72). A double net divided the tank.  The fish eventually
            moved toward point "B" and crossed the nylon maze.  The reaction of the
            fish and the avoidance of the maze was observed and filmed.  The fish species
            type (b) Sternarchus alb2ifrons usually reacts with an escape to a metallic ob-
            ject. In this case a metallic object was used to force the fish to cross the
            double net. Its avoidance to the obstacles was noted and filmed. Both fishes
            are practically blind. The experiment was repeated using a grounded aluminum
            foil along the inner wall of the water tank.
                  Experiment #2
                  This experiment was designed to establish the abiuty of an electric
  2          fish of the species mentioned under (a) and (b) to detect metallic or non-
            metallic objects having different masses and introduced in the water tank at
            different distances from the fish.  The fish was put at point "A".  The object
            was introduced at position "B".  The time until the fish detected the object
            was noted by observing the fish when it retracted or advanced in the direction
            of the object.  The experiment 2was repeated after lininc, the interior of the
            tank with aluminum foil (see Fig. 73).  The objects were made of iron, stain-
            less steel (non-magnetic), brass and plexiglass., all of the same volume and
            form (cylinders of 1 in. diam. 1 in. long).  The objects were fixed to a nylon
            thread and introduced vertically into the tank.
                   Experiment *3
                    This experiment was designed to demonstrate the 1ability of electric
            fish to detect a magnetostatic field.  The arrangement was similar with
            Experiment #2 but instead of using an object. in the water we used a per -
             mnent niagnet inside the tank. Magnets of 1 KG wrapped in polyethylene
                                               80

                                                                   E, lectric r, iF;h
                                                                     osition
         @,ventu,-,l direction of
                                                                                    Vvla'cr  Ta-Til-,
         fi,qli n,.,ovin- toi,/Prd".B
                                 2                                                Fiberc;-Iass  12ft   x 4 ft
                                                                                              'lets
                                                                                     Nylon 1
                            I   f  I
                                                                  Position of NVire llets
                                                    00  igure 72
                                                        81

                                                Electric  j-,isli Positioii "ti"
                                                Nylon
                                                                   Vvrate L- T,,iiilc
                                                              12 R @ and 4 ft high
                                                              made of fiberglass
                                             3               -0b,iect to be Introduced
                                                             Position "B".
                      Fig. 73.  The reaction time of the fish will be plotted
                                 against the same mass of different kinds of
                                 object materials.
                                                   82

              foil were used.  The reaction of the fish to the magnet was noted and filmed.
              The threshold of detection of the magnet by different fishes was noted.  The
              magnet was also moved toward the fish and its reaction observed and filmed.
                    Experiment #4
                    This experiment was designed to assess the ability of electric fish to
              detect DC, signals (Fig. 74).  The fish was positioned behind the nylon maze
   2           in the tank. Carbon electrodes were put in the tank on the other side of the
              maze.
                    Experiment #5
                    This experiment has been designed to relate a quantifiable parameter
              of the electric fish like its electric organ transmission rate to different stimuli.
              We used species of fish mentioned under (e) and (d).  The fish were put in a
              restrainino- device and introduced i2n the middle of the tank      straining
                       t5l                                             .  There
              device was provided with two stainless steel end electrodes, connected to an
              amplifier, an oscilloscope and a frequency counter.  The results were    tt
                                                                                    plo ed,
              relating object, materials and distance versus repetition rate of the signal
 2             (Figs. 75 and 77).
                    Experiment #6
                     This experiment was designed to relate the ability of electric fishes
              to communicate underwater and the distance at which they can manage it (see
              Fio,. 76).  The .,ic-,,nal strength of the fish was measured.  The original signal
              was recorded with carbon electrodes on a magnetic tape recorder and mon-
              itored on an oscilloscope. 2 This signal was played back with the same elect-
              rodes in the tank.  The reaction of the fish to its own signal or to a signal of
              another specimen of the same species Nvas observed and eventually filmed.
              Moti:on pictures were taken with a "Standard 811 camera, on color film (120 ft
                9 min.) and black and white film (40 ft 3 min.) for all behavioral experi-
              ments.
                                                823

                                              0
                                    p                Sli:'Lelded Cable
                                     2
                                            3
                     -=B                                C "Lrbon Electrodes
                                                        I ft apartIciii free ends
                                         R
                              R          2                  Oscilloscope
                              2
                         B    Battery (OpLimuin voltage was determined by e-xperl-
                              ments and set to 6 volts)
               p I., P2,   P  Polentio.-,Tieters calculated to have constant impedance
                              together N,,.,ith RI = resistor to correspond to the im-
                              p--odance of the ca2rbon electrodes inweler. measured
                                  -lie AC liquid iml)edance bfidc,
                              with t                        ,e
                  C and  R    capacitor and resistor to suppress sparlis -%vlien the
                         2
                              key is manipulated
                         k    key (telegraph t5,pe)
                                Fig. 74. DC sic0rnal syste
                                         84

                                                                                      Plexiglass tube
                                                                                      with fi.sli in it
                                                                                      and electrodes
                                                                                      at. the end
                                                               2                            Fibergl-.is's
                                                                                           VI,-Lter Ta
                                                                                                      n..
                                                                                      12 ft  x 4 ft li@igh
                               Aiiiplifier
   co          Oscilloscope
                        j.-equency
                        Center        Object to be                          ctrodes for Exl)eriiiieiit
                                      detected.
                               Fig. 75.  Quantifiable  experiment  for  assessing   the
                                         reaction of electric fish to objects  of  dif-
                                          ferent materials.

                                                       j@-,Iec'Lric Fish
                                 ..l,letwork
                                                                 Fibergl,-,ss lll,,tter T,-,.nk
                                                                 12 ft  x 4 ft h-J.,ah
                               a 0  0
                                   2                                            'odes
                                                          Transmittina- Electi
                                                         Acr
                                                              AgCl,   Posi@,ion E
               Oscilloscope         Imp.-d,,ince   AmDlifier   r@kii Tq-l)e Recorder
                                     Ne5twork
                        Fig. 76.  Experiment devised for observing the reaction
                                  of electric fish to its own or to another speci-
                                  m .en of the same species electric signals.
                                                    86

                         Approximately 3 minutes of film (from 120 to 75f       45  ft)  analyzes
                 the ability of Gymnarchus niloticus, an African fresh water weakly electric
                 fish, to swim through a double row of parallel nylon  fishing  lines  set  at  3
                 inches distance without touching them (Fig. 78).  -This species has vestigial
                 eyes., and is blind.  The movies show that the fish can pass through the2 lines
                 swimming  sometimes  at  relatively  high  speed  both  forward  and   backward.
                 The  Gymnarchus  niloticus  peculiar  way  of  swimming  can  be  seen  and  how
                 it uses its dorsal fin  in  an  undulating  screw-like  movement.  This  way  of
                 swimming enables the fish to hold, if necessary, the body in a straight
                 position and make good use of the navigational  and  detecting  ability  it  has
                 due to 2the electroreceptors array, in its active or passive mode of reception.
                 Another electric fish Sternarchus  albifrons  was  introduced  in  the  tank  to
                 demonstrate its ability to detect and interpret the electric signal of another
                 fish of the same species (75 ft mark on film).  Sternarchus has a ventral fin
                 and  uses  a  similar  swimming  technique  as  Gymnarchus.  The   fish   seemed
                 to be very disturbed at the be2ginning by the electric  signal  it  received.  It
                 looks like it is attracted and then repelled. The  fish  undulated  its  ventral
                 fin but it did not move becausd the ventral  fins  were  moved  back  and  forth
                 in a sequential backward and forward propelling action.  In this way the fish
                 is staying in a fixed position and it looks as if it ponders to  advance  or  to
                 retreat: the problem it has is to decide if the sign2al is from  a  bigoer  or  a
                 smaller fish. The  siomal  of  Sternarchus  No.  5*  was  recorded  on  magnetic
                 tape and played back in the tank with the h  elp of two 8 inch  long,  3/8  inch
                 thick carbon electrodes placed in  the  middle  of  the  tank.  The  signal  was
                 amplified to a slightly hiaher amplitude than the original signal (100 to
                 500 mV).
                    8The same species different specimens were numbered for statistical
                    purposes in the order we received them.
                                                      87

                                                                                                                                               
----------
                                                    -------------
                                                                                                                                               
2                    ----------
                                           10
                                                                                                                                               
--------              -------
                                                                                                                                               
LLI
             2                                                                                                                                 
----------
                  co
                  co                                                                                                          - -- - - - -     
-- - -- - - - - - - - - -
                                                      2                                                                                        
-I r+       -I
                                                                                                                oil
                                                                             1-i       .14
                                                                                                           2                -itttt
                                                                                                                            144-F-F
                                                               i4@ iri
                                               0                      10                    20                                           *0    
60                    701
                                              Fig. 77.                 Effect of different objects                                       (I In.
by I in. cylinder) on the electric signal
                                                                       repetition rate of the electric fish Gnathonenius                       
petersii.

                                                     v 4i
                                                             ,11 2uiT4z)no4 4nogiTm
                   azmu gull xIsTj uolau Tq2noatll sessed snzilollu snqDjeutu.&D         '2!a

                       The fish finally moved close to the electrodes to investigate the dis-
                turbance (at point marked -, 65 ft).  It moved directly under the electrodes.,
                turned around them, went on the other side of the net, returned to one of
                the electrodes and retracted to a far corner of the tank (,:. 55 R point).
                       Gymnarchus niloticus No.  7  was  introduced  in  the  tank.  The-  bounda2ry
                conditions were changed by lining the inner wall of the tank with heavy aluminum
                foil (Fig. 79). The fish is investigating the  tank  and  swimms  irratically  from
                one side of the tank'to the other side (,--- 40 ft point). Because the fish  seemed
                too nervous we took it out of the tank and put it back into  its  normal  aquarium.
                       Another specimen of Sternarchus albifrons (No. 5) was p2laced in the
                tank. A magnet covered with two layers of  polyvinyl  was  lowered  in  the  tarik.
                The fish obviously avoided the magnet (Fig. 68) and tried to escape its n-lag-
                netic field.
                       A piece of nylon rod about the size of the magnet and wrapped in the
                same polyvinyl was introduced into the tank.  The fish did not appear
                frightened.  The nylon rod could be brought very close to the 2fish before it
                slowly retreated.
                       A Gymnarchus niloticus No. 9 was put in the tank and the experiment
                with the magnet was repeated with similar results as for Sternarchus albifrons
                (25 feet to the end of the color film).  Both fishes reacted to the magnet
                   1000 gauss) at over I meter distance.
                        The electrical signals of two specimens of Gymnarchus niloticus and
                2one specimen of  Sternarchus  albifrons  and  of  Gnathonemus  petersii  have  been
                recorded ona magnetic tape as follows:
                        Gymnarchus  niloticus  N  =  9:     from 50 ft to 350 ft
                        Gymnarchus    niloticus N =  7:     from 375 ft to 710 ft
                        Sternarchus albifrons N  =  5-.     from 725 ft to 925 ft, and
                        Gnathonemus petersii  N  =  5.-     from 940 ft to 1250 ft
7
                                                     90

                                                             Li
            Fig. 79.  Fiberglass water tank lined with aluminum foil to check out
                      effect of boundary conditions.

                     The signals of both specimens were played back from the tape, am-
             plified to its original value, and connected to two electrodes (silver chloride
             or carbon) immersed in the water of the big fiberglass tank.  The Gymnarchus
             niloticus No. 7 was introduced in the tank and its behavior was filmed.  The
             fish sensed the signal played back from every corner of the tank (maximum
             180 cm).  It swam under the electrod2es and remained there for a while (Figs.
             80 and 81).  The experiment was repeated with the inner walls of the tank
             lined with aluminum.  The fish seemed to react faster.  When the signal was
             keyed the Gymnarchus reaction was very quick.
                     The two electrodes can be clearly seen at the beginning of  the  film.
             The tape-recorder can also be seen near the tank.     The fish seemed puzzled
             at the onset of th2e signal and criss-cros'sed the tank.  Then it came close to
             the electrodes, moved away, came close and again moved away.  We played
             the signal at their original level and then attenuated it by 40 dB and the fish
             would still react to the'recorded signal.
                    From the first and the second film we found that  the  electric  fishes
             can use their electric system to navigate  and  communicate  with  each  other
             if they are2 of the same species.  We did all our experiments in a closed
             room and the electrical wiring system in it produced a very high noise com-
             apred with the received signals. The fishes were not  disturbed  by  the  high
             noise, because their receiving sensory system would average the noise, but
             not the repetitive siaml of an electric fish.  If the electric signal of an
             electric fish of a different species was played back, the signal had t9o be  of
             a high level to be noticed by the sub-ect (over 5 V at the electrodes) if the
             subject was far from the electrodes: < 1. 5 m, and if the signal was gradually
             increased in strength from say 100 mV to 5 V. If the signal was keyed, the
             fish sometimes reacted to 1 V.
                                                92

                                                           t7-=
                               ;Lz-               64..fl #WA
           Fig. -$O.   Gy=archus      niloticus senses  signal of another fish of the
                       same species and directs itself toward the electrodes
                       (carbon electrodes).
           Fig. 81.    Gymnarchus niloticus stays under the electrodes (sil8ver-silver-
                       chloride) during replay of its own signal.
                                                  93

                 We also tried keyed direct current and observed that Gymnarchus
         niloticus would react to impulses of less than 1 V,, but it showed some
         habituation after ten or fifteen keyed signals at the same level. If we doubled
         the amplitude the fish would react again.
         2. 5    BEHAVIORAL     EXPERIMENTS     USING      PHYSIOLOGICAL      METHODS
                 Some electric fishes have a variable rate of electric signal beside
         2changes in their amplitude.  Gy=otus carapo, a fresh water South American
         weakly electric fish, Gnathonemus petersii and Alarcusenius sp.., both fresh
         water African weakly electric fish, belong to these species.  When an object
         is brought in their roximity they will usually increase the rate of their signal;
                            p
         this increase depended on the distance from object, its  size,  composition,
         acceleration, 2etc.  If the object comes too close to the fish, the fish may stop
         to transmit electric signals altogether.  Cessation of signal transmission may
         last for seconds or minutes; if the fish does not sense any danger it will re-
         sume after a while signaling at a very low rate.
                 The effect of a magnet on the signal repetition rate of  Gnathonemus
         petersii was studied.  The fish was confined in a lucite tube with electrodes
         at each end.  The fish in2creased the rate of the signal at a distance of 90 cm
         from the magnet from 2 per second to 10 per second.  When it reached 20 cm
         from the fish, the fish stopped transmittino,. Objects of stainless steel iron
         brass, aluminum and nylon., all 1 in. x 1 in. cylinders were immersed in
         the 12 ft fiberglass tank and their effect on Gymnarchus niloticus and
         Gnathonemus petersii recorded.  Gymnarchus niloticus was swimming freely
         8in the tank (Fig. 78), but Gnathonemus petersii  and  Gymnotus  carapo  have
         been confined in a tube as described above (Figs. 70 and 71).  The electric
         signals of the fish were picked up by shielded cables, amplified and displayed
         on an oscilloscope,, the repetition rate was recorded with a frequency counter.
                                             94

                    The brass cylinder was detected by Gnathonemus potersii at a distance
             of 100 cm.  It increased its frequency from a resting activity of 2 per second
            to 9 per second.  When the object was brought close to the fish (between 10
            and 20 cm), it stopped transmitting.  The iron cylinder effected the repetition
            rate of the signal at 30 cm, raising it to 8 per second.  The stainless steel
            did not affect t2he repetition rate until it was at 20 cm distance and then it
            raised it at 8 per second.  The nylon cylinder was detected at 5 cm distance
            and then it raised the repetition rate of the input to 14 per second, it did not
            stop transmitting even when the nylon touched the fish.
                   Our findings have been sumniarized in Fig. 77 showing the initial in-
            crease of impulse transmission and then their cessation, using brass, iron.,
           stain3less steel and nylon.
                                             95

                      3.  CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
                 In the previous chapters the transmitting organs, the electroreceptor
          system and behavior of some African and South American electric fishes was
          examined.  Electricalsignalstransmittedbyelectricfishesareveryspeeffic
          to species and subject.  Coding is in many cases very complex, having two
          or three degrees of freedom.
                 Electric fishes can use their elect2rorecep@or  array  in  an  active  or
          passive mode for detection, location  and  identification  purposes  of  under-
          water objects.  They use their transmitting-receiving system also for species
          reco,mition and communication.  From our experiments and observations we
          .concluded that electric fishes use their electroreceptors, the other sensory
          receptors of the lateral line system, chemical and gustatory sensors and
          their heari2ng ability in a hybrid cross  -correlating  and  integrating  system
          for detection and location of objects. - The Mormyrids (African electric fishes)
          add to this system their vision.
                  It is reasonable to assume that under water which is an environment
          difficult for communication, a cross-correlation between the signals re-
          ceived from different sensors as a result of different stimuli, would be more
          effective in a decision with regard 2to the nature, size, direction, speed, etc..,
          of an object, than any of the senses taken alone.
                  Accordingly we recommend that the sensory system of electric fishes
                                           is not enoua
          should be studied in detail.  It             ,h to find out what kind of receptors
          are used in their detection ability of objects., it is essential to study  what
          are the morphological, physiological and biochemical pro1cesses involved in
                                               96

             the detection of a particular object in a given environment; how are physical
             properties of objects distinguished, their movement, form,, size recognized
             and how is this information integrated in the higher nervous centers.
                    It is also important to use a number of species  having  different
             electrical transmitting and  receiving  system  characteristics.  Besides
             the obvious advantages of such a detailed research f2or practical purposes,
             the results would be beneficial in tracking down effects of different obnoxious
             stimuli on the nervous and cellular system of man.
                            (63)             (64)
                    McGeer       and Axelrod     investigated the neurotransmitters in the
             brain.  They mentioned dopamine, adrenaline, serotonin, octopamine, hista-
             mine, gamma aminobutyric acid, glutamic acid, aspartic2 acid and glycine.
             They dealt mainly with catecholamines, since more is known about these
             compounds than about the others.  The catecholamines include noradrenaline,
             dopamine and adrenaline.
                    Acetylcholine and acetylcholinesterase also play an important role
             not only in the brain, but in the whole nervous and muscular system. When
             high quantities of acetylcholine and its ester were needed, electri2c eels
             (Electrophorus electricus) have been used to extract the chemical from their
             main electric organs where it could be found in high quantities. It has been
             done at the Columbia University, New York, Department of Neuro.chemistry
             by Dr. Nachmansohn, and more recently at NIH by Dr.  Trams  and  Dr.
             Albers at the Department of Neurochemistry.  Professor Waser from the
             Physiological Institute in Zurich is extrac4ting the acetylcholine and acetyl-
             cholinesterase from Torpedo marmorata and I witnessed some of  their
             experiments.
                                                97

                   Besides the bisquaternary phosphorus compounds which are potent
           anticholinesterase it may be possible to produce anticatecholamines or any
           antineurotransmitters with catastrophic effects on the nervous system and
           mankind.
                   Not all the electric fishes use a neurotransmitter or the electric
           organs chemotransmitter acetylcholine-acetylcholinesterase. It can be said
           for sure that Sternarchus albifrons an2d Malapterurus electricus use other
           neurotransmitters.  These have to be investigated and identified because
           they n-iay be a prime source of another neurotransmitter than acetylcholine-
           acetylcholinesterase.
                   Narcine braziliensis is the only marine electric fish having two
           electric organs.  The main electric organ is thought to be similar to the
           electric organs of other torpedos.  The use of the second elect2ric organ is
           not known.  Because most research on location of objects and communication
           between fishes has been done on fresh water electric fishes, an investigation
           of the electric system of Narcine braziliensis may lead to very meaningful
           findings for marine environments.
                   Since we do not have all of the answers at hand with regard to the
           conplex hybrid sensory system of fresh water and marine electric fishes,
           it is impos2sible to desian and build an artificial system modeled on it. If
           we desire to copy something, first we have to know wbat we intend to copy!
                                               98

                                       RE@FERENCES
            1.     Darwin, Th, The Origin of Species., A variorum Text, Ed. by M.
                   Peckman, University of Pennsylvania Press, Phil. (1959), pp.
                   350-352 (original edition: 1860 to 1872).
            2.     Dahlgreen.. U., 'Origin of the Electricity Tissues in Fishes" Amer.
                   Nat. 44: 193-202 (1910).
            3.     Gar2ten, S., 'Die Production von ElectriziUt" in Handbuch der
                   Vergleichenden Physiologie by H. Winterstein (Ed.), Vol. 3.,
                   Part 2 (1910).
            4.
            5.
            6.
            7.
            8.     Szabo, Th., Nature, 194:4848:600-601(1962).
            9.
            10.    Nachmansohn, D. . Chemical and Molecular Basis of Nerve Activity,
                   A2cademic Press, New York (19o9).
            ii.    Meyerhoff, Otto, Zur Enercretik der ZellenvorF-,anae, Vadenhoech und
                   Ruprecht, Gottinc,,erl, German@ (1913T.
            12.    Vino(,rradov, A. P., The Elementary Chemical Composition of Marine
                   Organisms, (Efron an-d--Set-low, translators) Yale TJiiiversity Press,
                   New Haven, Conne4cticut (1953).

             13.     Suyama, M. and T. Tokuliiro, Bull..Japan Soc. Sci. Fisheries 19,
                     1003-1006 (1954).
             14.     Hasson, A. and C. Chagas, "Purification of AUcromolecular Com-
                     ponents of the Aqueous Extract of the Electric Organ (Electrophorus
                     electricus (L)), 11 in Bioelectro,-enesis by C. Chagas and A. P.
                     de Carvalho, Ed... Els2evier Publ. Co.., Amsterdam & New York (1961).
             15.     Fahn, S., R. W. Albers and G. J. Koval, "Electrophorus Adenosine
                     Triphosphatase, Science 143:283-284 (1964)-.
             16.     Changeux, J. -P. J. Gautron, M. Israel et Th. Podleski, Neurobiologie
                     moleculaire: Separation de Membranes Excitables a Partir de l'Organe
                     Electrique d'Electrophor2us electricus, 11 C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 269:
                     178-1701, Serie D. (1969).
             17.     Gautron,, J. . Microscope, Electron, Paris (1969).
                                  "Les Organes Electriques, 11 Superclasse des Poissons,
             is.     Fessard, A.
                     Tome XM, Fasc. II, pp. 1143-1238  Traite de Zooloc,,ie (P. -P.
                     Grasse Ed.) Masson et C2ie, Paris (i9-5ST.@@
             19.     Keynes, R. C. and H. Martins-Ferreira, "Membrane Potentials in
                     the Electroplates of the Electric Eel, J. Physiol.., London,
                     315-351 (1953).
             20.     Altamirano, M., C. W. Coates and H. Grundfest, "Mechanism of
                     Direct and Neural Excitability in Electroplaques of Electric Eel.,
                     J. Gen. Physiol. 38, 319-360 (1955).
             21.     Fessard, A. et L. 'raue, "Determination Microdldctrome'trique du
                     Potential de Repos de 1'Element Electroaene chez Torpedo marmorata,
                     C. R. Acad. Sci. . Paris, @33, 1228-1230 (1951).
             22.     Brock et coll. mentioned in Ref. 18.
             23.     Fatt
                          P. and B. Katz, J. Physiol. 118, 735 (1952).
             24.     Radi-l-NVeiss, T. and N. Kovacevic, "Biophysical Parameters in the
                                   "Mar. Biol. , Sprinoer-Verlacr, Berlin, 3  4 304-
                     Electric Fish
                     305 (1969).
                                               100

                                                       "Studies on the Morphology and
           25.     Grundfest H. and M. V. L. Bennett,
                   Electrophysiology of Electric Organs, 11 in Bioelectrogenesis by C.
                   Chagas and A. P. de Carvalho (Ed.) Elsevier Publ. Co... Amsterdam
                   (1961).
           26.     Feldberg, W. and A. Fessard., "Cholinergic Nature of the Nerves to
                   the Electric2 Organ of Torpedo,  J. Physiol. 1    200., London (1942).
                                                               io-ill
           27.     Albe-Fessard, D. and C. Chagas, Compt. rend. @39,, 1951 (1955).
           28.     Albe-Fessard, D., C. Chagas, A. Couceird and A. Fessard, J.
                   Neu.rophysiol. 14, 143 (1951).
           29.     Albe -Fessard, D. I C. Chagas and H. Martins2 -Ferreira, Anais. Acad.
                   Brasil CiencL3, 327 (1951).
           30.     Martins -Ferreira, H. and A. Couceiro, Anais. Acad. Brasil Ciene.
                   239 377 (1951).
           31.     Keynes, R. D. I M. V. L. Bennett and H. Grundfest, "Electrophysiology
                   of the Electric Organ of Nalapterurus electricus, 11 in Bioelectrogenesis
                   by C. Chagas and A. P. de Carvallio (Ed.2), Elsevier PubL Co..,
                   Amsterdam (1961).
           32.     Johnels, A. G. . "On the Origin of the Electric Organ in Nialapterurus
                   electricus, 11 Quart. J. Microscop. Sci 97, 455 (1956).
           33.     Bennett, M. V. L. and H. Grundfest, "Electrophysiology of Electric
                   Organs in Mormyrids, 11 in Bioelectrogenesis by C. Chagas and A. P.
                   de Carvalho 2(Ed.), Elsevier Pubi. Co., A  terdam (1961).
           34.     Aubert, X. P A. Fessard and R. D. Keynes, - "The Thermal Events
                   During and After the Discharge of the Electric Organs of Torpedo
                                     11 in Bioelectrogenesis by C. Chac
                   and Electrophorus,                                 ,-as a-n-d-X.-P.
                   de Carvalho (Ed.) Elsevier Pubi-.--2Co.-, Amsterdam (1961).
           35.     Bernstein., J. and-A. Tschermak, Pfliio,,er's Arch. ges. Physiol. 1-1-2-,
                   439-521 (1906).
           36.     Albe-Fessard, D. et H. Martins-Ferreira, "Role de la commande
                   nerveuse dans la synchronization du fonctionnement des elements de
                   l'organe dlectrique dur Gymnote Electrophorus electricus (L).., J.
                   1Physiol. 45  533, Paris (1953).
                                             I r% i

            37.     Agalides  E. , "The Lorenziiii ampulla: A Multisensory Receptor and
                    its Possible Physical Analog, 11 Trans.- N. Y. Acad. Sci., H:31:8:1083-
                    1102 (1969).
            38.     Lissman, H. W.., and K. E. Machin, "The Mechanism of Object
                    Location in Gymnarchus niloticus and Similar Fish, ?I J. Exptl. Bio-
                    lom 35, pp. 451-486.
  2                   t,Y
            39.     Szabo, Th. and A. Fessard, "ElectrorC-c6pteurs chez les Mormyres.,
                    J. Physiol.L7, pp. 343-360, Paris (1965).
            40.     Agalides, E. . "Sensitivity and Behavioral Reaction of Sharks to
                    Electric Stimuli, 11 Final Report ONR Contract No. 4773(00) No. 104-
                    8632 1967.
            41.     Dijkgraaf, S., "Electr2oreception in the Catfish, Amiurus nebulostm
                    ExperientiaL4, pp. 187-188 (1968).
            42.     Murray, R. W., "Electroreceptor Mechanism "J. Physiol. 1
                                                                               L8 0-1
                    pp. 592-606, London (1965).
            43.     Roth, A. Z.. "Electroreception in the Catfish., Amiurus nebulosus.,
                    Vergleich. Phys2iol. 61, pp. 196-202 (1968).
            44.
            45.     Dijkgraaf, S., In Lateral Line Detectors (P. Cahn, Ed.)., pp. 83-852
                    Indiana Univer:iity Press, Bloomington, Indiana (1968).
            46.     Agalides, E., "The Lorenzini Ampulla, 11 N. Y. Acad. of Sci. Trans.
                    la LI, @, pp. 1083-1102 (1969).
            47.     Harder, W., Z. fur vergl. Physiol. 59     -3218 (1968).
                                                           272
            48.     Dotterweich, H., "Bau und Funktion der Lorenzinischer Ampullen,,
                    Zool. Jahrbucher 50 (1932).
            49.     Barets, A. and T. Szabo, "Ultrastructure des cellules sensorielles,
                    Proc. 3rd Reg. Conf. (Eur.) Electron Microscopy,, Prac,,ue, pp. 327-
                    378 (19680).
                                             102

            50.    Lissman., HI W. and A. M. Mullinger, "Organization of Ampullary
                   Electric Receptors in Gymnotidae., II.Proc. Roy. Soc. B 169p 345-
                   378 (1968).
            51.    Szamier, R. B. and A. W. Wachtel, "Special Cutaneous Receptor
                   Organs of Fish, 11 M, J. Morph. 128, 261-290 (1969).
            52.    Szamier, R. B. and A. W2. Wachtel, "Special Cutaneous Receptor
                   Organs of Fish,," IV@ J. Ultrastruct. Res. 30, 450-471 (1970).
            53.    Bennett., M. V. L. . "Electroreceptors" in Fish Physiology, Vol. 5
                   by W. S. Hoar and D. J. Randall (Eds.), Acade  ic Press, New
                   York (1971).
            54.    Hagiwara, S. @ T. Szabo and P. S. Enger., "Electroreceptor Mech-
                   anism in a 2High-Fre-quency Weakly Electric Fish, Sternarchus
                   albifron    J. Neurophysiol. 28, 784-799 (1965).
            55.    Belbenoit., P.. "Le Role de la Decharge Electrique dans la Localization
                                                                    "J. de Physiol. 59
                   d'Objects en Milieu Aqueux chez les Mormyrides,
                   4 bis, 344-345, France (1967).
            56.    Franz, V.,2 "Zur Mikroskopisdiea Anatomie der Mormyriden., 11 Zool.
                   Jahrb. , Abt. Anat. Ontog. TiereL2t 91-148 (1920).
            57.    Bullock, T. H.., "Seeing the World through a New Sense: Electro-
                   reception in Fish, 11 American Scientist, Vol. 61, No. 3, pp. 316-
                   325 (1973).
            58.    I-Calmijn, A. J.,, "The Elect2ric Sense of Sharks and Rays, 11 J. Exp.
                   Biol. 55, pp. 371-383 (1971).
            59.    Szabo, Th., "The Activity of Cutaneous Sensory Organs in Gymnarchus
                   niloticus, 11 Life Sciences No. 7, pp. 285-286, Pero,,amon Press Ltd.
                   G. B. (1 62).
            60.    Szabo, Th. and H. - Sakata, tIEtudes sur un tlfeedbacklt sensoriel
               1    participant a la r6gulation du rythmic des influx e'le'ctrosensoriels
                   chez des Gy=otides, 11 J. de Physiolgie T:59:1 bij, pp. 300-301.
                   (1967).

           61.    Szabo, Th. and S. Hagiwaraf "A Latency-Change Mechanism Involved
                  in Sensory Coding of Electric Fish (Mormyrids)2" Physiol. & Behavior
                  .@, 331-335, Pergamon Press, London (1967).
           62.    Watawabe, A. and F. H. Bullock, Personal Communication to Szabo
                  and Hagiwara in Ref. 61.
           63.    McGeer, P. L., "The Chemistry of Mind, 11 American 8Scientist 59,
                  2t 221-229 (1971).
           64.    Axelrod, J. , "Neurotransmitters, Scientific American 230, 6" 58-71
                  (1974).
                                             104

