                    Depoll.0  of HEALTH, EDUCATION, A@4D  -:LFAFI     PuL Heatil@ S'ervic.e,.
                               .NAT IO NAL  I NSTI T U TES         0 F   HEALTH
                                                31 January 1957
        lt4 PtgPt.Ytf4,X ADDITISS THC
      MAlftONAL INSRITUT2Z OF MENTAL HEALTH
        Acoicnbm Rt$gA)tCH CIMT11t
      U.S. PIJSUC HEALTH SgltVICt MOSP47AL
           p'0. Sol zooo
          LaximsTo;q. Kgnrucxy
               The information"oh F-230    which you sent on   January   25th
               Is most helpful.  Do you    have2  any  information  about
               supplies of this compound7
               Since our dogs run between 7 and 20  ki-lo-grams  and  since
               the dose in dogs seems to be izt the  order  of  100  mg./kg.
               we would be using approximately an average of 1 gra.-,.  per
               trial,  we  could,  therefore,  test  about  10  dogs.  This
               number  might2  be  insufficient.  I  would  like  to  obtain
               more of the  conpound.  %Ieanivhile  we  will  begin  some
               .very simple preliminary work  with  the  amount  on  hand..
               I am getting into about the same s-ituation with BOL.
               Prel'iminary work  with  this  compound  indicated  that  mild
               LSD-like effects began to  appear  in  hum,;En  subjects  with
               total d2oses of about  4  mg.  I  have  written  the  Sandoz  Co
               asking if they could supply more of    'this compound, and
               am withholding attempts at blocking the LSD-reaction with
               BOL until  I  hear  from  them.
               Results wl-"th 'LI'le second batch oj' Olioliqti seeds  were
               identical with the  results  obtained  v;ith  the  first  lot.
               With doses ra2ngi.ng up to  5  grams  total  there  was  no
               evidence-of any psychosomimetic activity.
               Doctor Wlkler will be in lilashlngton from    Februarv Lith  to
               the-8th.  He is on a pror,.,otion '.-oard and could    probably
               be located at the  PHS  headquarters,  If  you  desire  to  see
               him for an  reason.
                          y
                           2                  Very sincerely  yours,
                                             Harris Isbell,
                                             Director
               Hl:rn

