                                                               7 July 1965
               Dear
               Recentlv I supported a visit to Graz, Austria and  Moscow,
               U.S.S.R., by                lwho had been invited  to attend-
               several informal conzerences on the matter of electro-
               sleep and electro-anesthesia.  Subsequently on his return,
               he spent the week of June 27th in mv office2 reviewing
               his material and preparing a report on his visit and ex-
               periences.
               There was no aspect of his trip or his vis'Lts which were
               involved in any security classification and therefore his
               final renort is an unclassified one.  Knoviing of vour past
               interest in this area of work, I am enclosing herewith a
               copy of              )report wnich you may retain for your
        3       own purposes.
               Kind personal regards.
                                                             Sincerelv

                            REPORT ON ELECTRO-SLEEP AND ELECTRO-ANESTliESTA
                                     IN EUROPE AND THE SOVIET UNION
          Historical.
                     I have been actively engaged in  the  field  of  electro-anesthesia
                for approximately  three  years.  Thia  interest  occurred  academically
                at first, because of my curiosity regarding animal work, at which
                time I participated in the building of2  a  unit  for  experimental  pur-
                poses.
                     After an initial success, four individuals, including myself,
                formed a corporation,                                          to   pro-
                duce and market the instrument.  It  was  my  responsibility  to  intro-
                duce the apparatus to medical institutions  and attempt to get re-
                search programs started. In this  connecti;n  I  participated  in  orig-
                i2nal research as well as cooperated  with  practically  all  individuals
                in this country working with electro-anesthesia.
                     Our small corporation was bou ht out by  a  lar-e  organization  in
                                                   9               a
                July, 1964, and I joined it in the same capacity I had been fulfilling
                with        In February 1965 1 severed connections  with  this  company.
                     2As part of the introductory process I  have  presented  papers  and
                seminars to various branches  of  the  government,  American  Veterinary
                Medical Associations, the  Atomic  Energy  Commision,  medical  schools,
                and the Bio-Engineering section of IEEE                   also took
                part in the first bio-engineering symposium held at
                     I was one of the individuals responsible for organizing the first
    2            and second sympnsiums for electro@-anesthesia held in'     land      !in
                Colorado and Tennessee, respectively.
                     At  the                                where I presented  a  paper,
                I met with                        ''tor from
                                            .1'a visi              , @ I who issued an
                invitation for me to come to a meeting to be held in  Graz,  Austria  in
 2               May, 1965. Further developments led to my  visit  to  the  Soviet  Union
                and other European countries during this period.
                     The purpose of my trip to Europe was  to  determine  different  me-
                thods be4.ng used to produce electro-sleep  and  electro-anesthesia  and
                to evaluate the effectiveness  of  those  methods*  Of  primary  concern
                was securing information regarding methods presently in use 7in the
                Soviet Union.
                     Basically, I was to inquire as to the use  or  possible  effect  of
                electronic techniques with hypnosis, sl&eep, narcosis and electro-shock

                 therapy.
                       This report will be in two secti.ons, the first concerning electro-
                 sleep and the second, electro-anesthesia.
                 PART I :  ELECTRO-SLEEP
                       I attended a conference organized  by  Dr.  F.  Wageneder  at  the
                 University of Graz, Austria  for  the  purpose  of  discussing  electro-
                 sleep. It was assumed that  the  participation  of  2a  group  from  East
                 Germany might lead to an invitation  to  visit  their  facility  and  gain
                 more knowledge of what was going on in the eastern countries.
                       Professor Dr. M. Herbst of  the  Karl  Marx  University,  Leipzig,
                 East Germany did attend but was  no  help.  He  was  not  aware  of  the
                 latest techniques  in either the East or West  and  seemed  to  be  pre-
                 sent more in the capacity of 2an  observer  rather  than  as  a  partici-
                 pant.
                       Hoping to further my contacts, it was arranged to have Dr.
                 Wageneder call Dr. M. G. Ananev in Moscbw  and  inform  him  of  my  visit
                 to Graz and the fact,that !'had been on the program
                           jsymposium in April. As hoped,  Dr.  Ananev  asked  if  it  would
                 be possible for me to visit with  his  group;  after  some  trying  moments
2                 this was arranged and results will be covered herein.
                       Dr. Wageneder has a fin ancial interest in  AVL,  a  company  that
                 is producing his "Electrodor&', a sleep machine patterned after the
                 Soviet  "Electrosohn".  actually  incorporating  the  latest  techniques
                 presently in use but not  yet  adopted  in  the  commercially  available
                 Soviet instrumentation.  This  unit  u2ses  a  combination  AC-DC  current.
                 The frequency of the square wave  component  varies  from  30  to  250cps.
                 The width may be varied from .2--to  1.4  millisec.  The  current  is  ad-
                 justable from 0 to 5 milliamperes.
                       There are now three sleep  stations  in  operation  in  Austria:  the
                 one already mentioned in Graz, another operated by Till Tesarek, Ph.D,
                 M. D., 2in Vienna, and a third  by  Prim.  Dr.  Stepan  in  Hartberg.  In
                 addition, units have been  purchased  by  Dr.'s  Leonhard,  Vorau;  Konrad,
                 Klagenfurt; and Eichhorn, Graz.
                       According to the distributing @4irm,%'Oa'.Ddelga,  Vienna,  orders
                 have been received  from  almost-every  part  of  Europe.  Units  delivered
                 outside Austria to date include those to Prof. Bartschi2-Rochaix, Bern,
                 Switzerland; Dr. Rochmuth, Berlin, West Germany and Dr. Natalie
                 Krumovska, Sofia, Bulgaria.
                       I received information that sleep  clinics  had  been  set  up  in
                 the following locations, with  the  Soviet  apparatus,  or  a  home-made
                 model:

                                                                                      3
                  Czechoslovakia 10 stations
                  Bulgaria - 5 stations
                  Hungary 5 stations
                  Israel 1 station
                  Soviet Union 300 stations
                  Paris, France Dr. A. Limoge
                  Paris, France Dr. A. Djourna
                  Altjessen, Germany - Wolfgang Rentsch
                  Wolfsburg-Wiesengrund, G2ermany - Dr. Siegfried Koeppen
                  Zagreb, Bogoviceve - Prim. Dr. Arnulf Rosenzweig
                  All of these centers are under the -tirect supervision of Medical
                  Doctors and trained medical technic-.-ans.
                     The Graz center has been in operation two years utilizing 6 units
                  and is solidly booked until September.  Dr. Wageneder has presented
                  very ambitious plans to the Austrian government for2 a new complex  to
                  house a large sleep center and research facility, and he claims  they
                  are looking favorably on the proposal.
                      I questioned Dr. Wageneder as to where his patients come from
                  and how they find their way to his clinic (operated in the Medical
                  School Hospital).  He replied that most of them are referred by other
                  docl-ors from throughout Europe. He said others have come aft2er  reading
                  stories in the newspapers and magazines. During the time I  was  pre-
                  sent, his patients were from Austria, Denmark, Switzerland, Hungary and-
                  Germany.  Most were being treated for sleep disorders.
                      Conversations with Dr. S. Roitenburd, generally regarded  as  the
                  father of electro-sleep and Dr. W. W. BanschtschikDv of the Soviet
                  UnionSociety of Neuro2-pathologists and Psychiatrists brought out  the
                  following points.  First and foremost, the Soviets,regard the term
                  fielectro-sleep" as a misnomer, they do not expect nor particularly  de-
                  sire their subjects to sleep diiifing treatment.  They continually
                  stressed the fact that "electro-sleep" is a form of therapy, and  in-
                  sisted it t just coincidental that it will help those 2persons  afflicted
                  with problems related to sleep. The main reason being  that  those  pro-
                  blems are generally related to the nervous system, and it is  felt  that
                  the total nervous system is being treated with the  instrument.  In  ad-
                  dition, it-was made quite clear to me that a series of at least 20  con-
                  secutive treatments was necessary to achieve a true therapeutic  effect.
                      Dr. Till Tesarek2, Vienna, advanced the theory  that  the  current
                  acts as a stabilizer to the para-sympathetic vaso-depressive function
                  and it is not strong enough to go through the brain, but  rather  enters
                  through the blood system, veins, arteries and then spreads throughout
                  the system.
                       Tesarek feels that insomnia is just a symptom of  another  disease,
                  and that when you treat that disease with elect5ro-sleep,  insomnia  dis-

                                                                                         4
                appears also. He felt it  had  particular  advantage  in  giving  relief
                to older patients afflicted with tht symptoms of arteriosclerosis,
                headaches and vertigo. He claims, as  do  the  Soviets,  that  he  can
                bring about a lowering of blood pre.;sure in h.-.rpertensive  individuals,
                where the cause is not or2ganic, and control.it  with  the  use  of  electro-
                sleep, without any form  of  drug  treatment.  Dr.  Roitenburd  claims
                cures of Buerger's disease, with no  recurrences  for  over  eight  years.
                The example was also cited of a patient with an ulcer confirmed by
                X-Ray who started taking electro-sleep  treatments  for  a  nervous  dis-
                order, during the course of treatment  he  happened  to  have  another
       2         X-Ray taken, at which time it was  noticed  the  ulcer  had  disappiared.
                This was reported by all workers using  the  treatment  for  a  considerable
                length of time, i. e. Banschtschiipvp Roitenburd, Wageneder and Tesarek.
                     I questioned the Soviets about the  use  of  conjunctive  drug  ther-
                apy, and all replied that unless the individual  was  in  a  hospital  for
                treatment, t2here was no use  made  of  conjunctive  therapy.  Drugs  were
                never used in any of the  clinics  in  combination  with  electro-sleep.
                     All the Soviets were firmly corr@inced that  NASA  was  using  electro-
                sleep on the astronauts in the Gemini series,  that  there  was  a  good
                deal of work going on in the U. S. and that  we  just  were  not  talking
                about it. I explained to them that we knew  it  was  bein2g  used  in  the
                Cosmos series, which they denied  vehemently.  After  one  day  of  talking,
                I think I finally convinced them that I  was  telling  the  truth  about
                our lack of use of electro-sleep.
                     At this point they  became  rather  incredulous,  expressing  the
                feeling that it was inconceivable to them that  in  a  country  as  medi-
                cally advanced as the U. S., we would  not  betaking  full  2use  of  a
                tool as successful as electro-sleep.
                     They stated that even though we might  feel  the  claims  were  exag-
                gerated, or even if we felt they were  outright  lies,  the  fact  re-
                mained that the treatment was harmless, and  we  should  at  least  have
                investigated the procedure to find out for ourselves.
                     When questioned as to use  in  their  space  program,  Roitenburd
                2said, "it hasn't been used yet because  the  capsule  can't  contain  any
                sophistic,ated equipment, only that necessary for maintenance in
                space." He did say that all  the  cosmonauts  were  underi5oing  electro-
                sleep routinely in their training program, and  that  its  future  use  is
                anticipated. Presumably it would be useful  in  four  ways:  (1)  to  es-
                tablish new s2leep-work cycles; (2) use  in  space  during  extended  tra-
                vel where sl!eer fatigue is a problem; (3) if something should go
                wrong in space  such as emotional  disturbances,  nervous  disorders,  etc.,
                when recovery has been made the period  of  treatment  could  begin  im-
                mediately with quick results without any waitine period; (4) its routz.
                ine use putting the men and women in a relaxed, receptiv3e frame of
                mind.

                                                                                      5
                     Further investigation  is being conducted in connection  with  over-
                coming jet-flight fatigue involved i-n time zone  changes,  presumably
                it is also being experimented with in extended  transportation  in  the
                Red Army.  They claim very promising results.
                     Roitenburd says whenever he goes into different  time  zo2nes  he
                g3.ves himself a one hour treatment on arrival and is  quite  refreshed
                and ready for work at its termination. It seems that  it  is  being  used
                as an aid to promote the adaptive process generally.
                     Roitenburd and Banschtschilov both stated that  the  published  re-
                ports of one hour of electro-sleep being as good as eight hours of nor-
                mal sleep are true, however both malntained that  t2hey  never  intended
                to suggest that hhis could be used in a situation whereby  a  man  would
                work eioht hours, sleep one, and then work  eight  again.  They  felt
                       c'
                that it should be obvious to medical personnel that this  would  not  be
                possible; they were only relaxing the nervous  system,  nothing  else,
                and felt unhappy that the U.S. popular magazines reported  it  in  that
              2  manner.
                     They were also most insistent that a course of at least 20
                treatments was necessary to get the true therapeutic value; the
                treatments are given 5 days a week for four  weeks.  I  inquired  about
                a possible placebo effect and all Soviet investigators  agreed  that  it
                was possible to obtain this in so far as the sleep  was  concerned,  but
                all maintained that in the control group2s of many studies made by them,
                no therapeutic value was seen.
                     Dr. tzuzin, Chief Surgeon, First Medical Institute of  Moscow,  did
                not feel electro-sleep was really a subject for  much  more  research,
                as they have been using it routinely@for a number  of  years.  He  is
                using it in post operative care and in conjunction  with  local  anesthe-
                tics to achieve optimum effect and re2laxation of the patient.
                     In questioning about other facets of its use, i. e. hypnotic
                effect, etc. it was bkought out that  patients  have  received  relief
                from bo4h'ep-'Lleptic attacks (not specified whether grand mal or  petit
                mal) over an extended period, after  electro-sleep  treatment  (without
                further drug therapy) and the-fact that there had  been  no  recurrences
               2 of Buerger'@s disease in five patients over an eight year  period  was
                also cited. I gathered the impression that  electro-sleep  is  now  a
                routine measure,gi;;en in treatment of Buerger's  syndrome.  I  ques-
                tioned Dr. Banschschilbv about possible hypnotic suggestion made
                during the period the patients were actually asleep  (  6ne-third  do
                sleep during treatment), and0 this was the only time  during  the  visit
                that I felt he attempted to evade the question. He  talked  a  lot  about
                many things, but would not give a straight answer to that.
                     Dr. Roitenburd maintained that electro-shock  therapy  is  practi-
                cally non-existent in the Soviet Union at this time,  that  those  cases

                                                            dergoing extended periods
                   previously treated in that manner were now un
                   of electro-sleep, and in some cases were receiving drug therapy also.
                   Interestingly enough, Dr. Tesarek felt that electro-sleep was of no
                   value in treating individuals with deep neuroses  or hypochondriac symp-
                   toms, such as would ordinarily need 3 or 4 years of ps2ychiatric care.
                   The Soviets did not share this view at all.
                    Much to my surprise the Soviets, including representatives of
                   14ed-export, told me that the rights to the Electrosohn in the United
                   States had been sold to General Electric Company.
                     One of the newer developments technically in this field is the
                   use of white noise as a substitute for the square wave in the appa-
             2      ratus.  Both the Soviets and Wageneder mentioned this, and Wageneder
                   is supposed to send over a prototype of a new machine making use of
                   this principle.  He is also sending one of his standard commercially
                   available instruments.
                     The procedure after an individual has been accepted for treat-
                   ment is as follows:  (1) the patient is given a thorough physical ex-
                   amination by the2 physician; (2) upon admission to the clinic a chart
                   is prepared (inclosure A) indicating the complete data to be taken
                   during the electro-sleep treatment; (3i in a quiet, darkened room the
                   patient changes into hospital pajamas, lies down and the electrodes are
                   adjusted; (4) an M. D. slowly turns up the current until the patient
                   reports a tingling sensation.  No further2 increase of current is in-
                   dicated and the patient is left alorie for the remainder of the treat-
                   ment.  Normally the current used is 1.2 milliamps.; the frequency of
                   the square wave component is 100cps although recent workers report
                   good results with frequencies up to 250'cps.  All workers claim
                   that there,-is no evidence of cataract development and the Soviets in
      2             over 100,til)Dcases have not reported any statistical increase over that
                   normally expected in the population.  Although the initial treatment
                   is given by an 14. D. usually atrained rvurse gives subsequent treat-
                   ments.
                      The timer is set, ordinarily for 90 minutes, when the instru-
                   ment automatically shuts off.  if the patient is sleeping at the
                   time, 2he is left alone until he awakens.  Routine checks are made,
                   of course, to determine his condition and the operativeness of the
                   instrumet@t.  The electrodorm has built-in devices to shut off auto-
                   matically if the-electric current reaches 5 milliamps.
                   SUMMARY
                   (1)  No ill effects have been reported by any of the workers.
                   (2)  The patient, is not expected to sleep du0ring the treatment, although
                       one third do so after the first few treatments.

                                                                                       7
                (3) A course of at least 20  treatments  is  absolutely  necessary  before
                     it may be determined the treatioent is  not  effective;  sometimes
                     the effec-it will show up shortly after the 20th session.
                (4) There may be an intensification  of  the  symptoms  being  treated
                during the 25-12th sessions, after which  they  will  disappear  gradually.
                (5), Each treatment lasts from 60-120 minutes  depending  on  the  con-
                ditions involved.
                (6) Placebo effect may be seen in so far  as  one  third  sleeping  are
                concerned, but in no case will there be  any  therapeutic  effect  seen.
                (7)  All diseases of  the nervous syjtem are  considered  for  treatment
                by elect2ro-sleep.
                (8) A physician is in charge of all  sleep  stations,  assisted  by  med-
                ically trained personnel.
                (9) Treatments are evaluated as one  third  successful,  one  third  par-
                tially, with complete success coming late in  treatment,  one  third  un-
                successful.
                (10) Routine use of electro-sleep therapy was accepted without question
                by every indivi2dual with whom I came in contact  in  the  Soviet  Union.
                     The importance of electro-sleep in the Soviet  Union  may  be  seen
                from the fact that there are over 300  stations  now  operating,  each
                with an M. D. in charge.  Officials seem so convinced of the effective-
                ness of treatment that Banschschikov  and  Roitenburd  report  difficulty
                in obtaining more funds to do further research;  the  feeling  being  that2
                its value has already been proven.
                     While the claims for  electro-sleep  seem  grossly  exaggerated,and
                even suggest "quackery", the fact remains that  data  is  available  on
                over 100,000 patients treated over the  past  12  years.  In  addition,
                personnel with whom I had contact in  Austria,  Switzerland,  France  and
                Italy fully corroborate these findings.
                    2 This leads us to the inevitable conclusion  that  in  the  United
                States we have had a gross misconception of  the  use  of  electro-sleep
                 "hniques, and this with a lack of  accurate  information  as  to  the
                tee
                methodology involved has in effect halted  research  in  this  country.
                Perhaps the biggest misconception of all is  the  commonly  held  belief
                that electro-sleep means just sleep, which a2s it turns  out  is  not  the
                case at all.
                     Dr. Banschschikov is holding a meeting in Moscow d  uring  August  on
                the subject of sleep. The meeting,  closed  except  to  invited  officials
                and doctors in the'lbscow area, will consider  the  latest  techniques  in
                electro-sleep, the results of the past 10 years  and  the  direction  re-
                search should take in the future. Presumably this  1will  be  part  of  a
                campaign for -more funding from the government. I  have  been  told  that

                                                                     arranged for me
                   if I am able to be in 14oscow at that time it will be
                   to attend the syuiposium) with an interpreter to assist me in under-
                   standing the discussions.
                   PART 11
                   Electro-anesthesia
                     Upon arriving in the Soviet Union I immediately attempted to
                         2                         as a Sunday, I was unsuccessful-
                   contact Dr. Ananev, but since it w                aken by car to
                   The following morning we did make cor@tact and I was t
                   the Research institute for Experimental Surgical Apparatus and
                   'Instruments.  After much preliminary formality I was introduced to
                                - Deryabena of the Institutel whom I found was in
                   Dr2. Valentina L                           onic anesthesia.  Fol-
                   charge of the work being conducted in electr
                   lowing introductions we, accompanied by two interpreters, went to
                   the office of the' director where we spent considerable time dis-
                   cussing the field in general.  After about two hours the second
                   interpreter left us and the talks continued.
                      I found that quite by coincidence I had 2appeared on the scene
                   at the same time the bi-annual meeting'of the Institute was being
                   held.  As far as was known in the office of the Air Attache"in
                   London I was the first American allowed to attend.  At the con-
                   clusion of the papers in which I was intereste d, I was asked to
                   present a short talk on the state of the art in the United States,
                   which I did.
                      Now 2as to the actual information exchanged,first of all the
                   Soviets were thoroughly familiar with all the work published in
                   the U. S.  They quoted liberally from reprints of Knutson, Hardy,
                   Smith et al.  They seemed quite surprised that I was not familiar
                   with their recent work in the--field.  This led to a general dis-
                   cussion of the difficulty in exchanging information quickly, with-
                   out having2 to wait-for the Journals, which sometimes have delays up
                   to 18 months in the printing of submitted articles in the Soviet
                   Union as well as here.  We all agreed it would be advantageous to
                   set up a system whereby one central location, whether here or there,
                   would receive at least abstracts of current work and then publish a
                   monthly or quarterly bulletin, so we would all be up to date, and
                   2@@eliminate the present information gap that L-xists.  I feel it would
                   be possible to do this and would very much lil@e to see the possi-
                   bility explored further.
                        In the opening period of our talks I mentioned our recent work,
                   especially the papers presented at the          ISymposium, and in
                   turnattempted to determine the current state of the art there.  We
                   sparred 0for quite a while, but when the second interpreter left the
                   ifoom, Dr. Deryabena seemed to loosen up and the information came
                   quite readily.  I don't know the significance of this, but it did
                   occur in that manner.

                             . ..... . ...............................
                                                                                    9
                    At first she told me they had experimented with the  sine  wive
                 at 700 cps as reported by many of our investigators, but thcy did not
                 like the results.  When I asked aboiit the combination of AC-DC that
                 had been reported from the Soviet Union, she sai2d "Oli, we haven't
                 used that for five years." She see-ned honestly surprised t:o hear
                 that we were still attempting it. At that point it came  out  that
                 that while Dr. Ananev was generally given credit by the western
                 countries for the work, she anZ her collaborators had actually been
                 responsible. All published papers from the Institute  list  Ananev
                 as first author, since he is th2e director.
                    She also mentioned they had experimented with square waves,
                 white noise generators, triangular wave forms, etc.,but seemed a
                 little reluctant to say what was actually being used.  At this point
                 she mentioned that in the next session a report would be given  on
                 the use of electro-anesthesia in human subjects and I would  learn
                 what I wished there, and would be introduced to the doc2tors who had
                 done the investigating.
                                                 while attending the  S@mposium  in
                    Last year Dr.
                 Colorado made mention of the fact that a Soviet scientist visiting  his
                 hospital in San Francisco had started to tell him of a new  devel-
                 opment in electro-anesthesia, and had in fact started to draw  pictures
                 of a new type of wave form being tried. At thi2s point one  of  his
                 fellow scientists said something in Russian and the man said he was
                 sorry but he couldn't say more.  Dr.
                 roundation had somewhat the same experience.
                     At this point in our discussions I decided to mention  to  Dr.
                 Deryabena that we had tried a method of mixing the wave  forms  (which.
                 seemed to be what the Russians had indicated to
                 She said I would learn all about th2at the next day.
                     One point that she was quite emphatic about was  that  all  workers
                 in the Soviet Union had completely abandoned the use of any form of
                 direct current. She said they had definitely established  that  DC
                 caused morphological changes in the brain, along  with  behavorial
                 changes and DC was no longer even considered a matter  for  discussion.
                     At this point Dr. Geselevich, Deputy Dir2ector of the Institute
                 and Chief of Experimental Surgery, came into the room and joined the
                 discussion.' He asked how the United States Army was coming  along
                 with their field use of the procedure. When I said we  were  not  using
                 it, he became almost belligerent, insisting he knew we  were.  He  went
                 so far as to send a secretary out to try to find a bulletin describing
                 what we were doing, but she co5uldn't find it.  It took a great deal of
                 hard talking to convince him he had misinformation.  This once again
                 pointed up what misunderstandings have occurred in this field.  He felt

                                                                                   10
                 we'were far along and were attemptir,g to hide our findings from
                 him; I answered that this was exactly the attitude prevalent here.
                 At the end he became quite friendly and joined freely in further talks.
                    In the Sovi dt Union there are two groups experimenting with
                 alectro-anesthesia.  The one wh2ere I was visiting, and anotlier at
                                                                 the two, but they
                 Kiev.  There seemed to be quite a rivalry between
                 both agreed on the new wave form being used.
                    This new approach is called 11 interfering qurrent", so named
                 because it consists of four electrodes sending in two separate sine
                 wave signals, in a criss-cross manner. Forexample if 2one  oscillator
                 is putting out 1000 cps the other might be set for 1300 cps or
                 2250 cps, etc. The important thing was to keep the second  frequency
                 within 100-300 cps of the beat of the first frequency.  I will de-
                 scribe this more fully shortly.
                     At the meeting, the paper dealt with human usage at the First
                 Medical Institute of Moscow and it was presented by Dr. V. D.
                 2Schoskovsky and Dr. V. I. Schaskov.  They reported over 200 operations
                 on human patients using "interfering current" and gave the results,'
                 which were quite favorable.  The instrument is being used routinely
                 in their hospital, although it is definitely still considered in the
                 experimental stage and is not in use throughout the entire country
                 as we had been led to believe here.  In fact their institution, one
            2     other in Moscow and one in Kiev are the only ones doing human work
                 at the present time.  They do expect several more institutions to
                 start using it as quickly as they get the personnel trained.
                     Dr. Deryabena reported on the development of the "interfering
                 current" by the engineers at the institute.  She did not mention
                 animal work, presumably because it had taken place years ago.  In
                 private con2versation she said most of their experimental work had
                 been done on primates.  she safd that although they were convinced
                 that "interfering current" was by far the best method they had
                 tried, they were not completely satisfied, and research would go
                 forward using new methods as quickly as their scientists could de-
                 velop instrumentation. From the talk, l- gathered financing was  not
                 a problem in this 2area.
                      The basic idea of the criss-crossing of electrodes in a
                 t-emporal-occipital arrangement is to make the brain do the work of
                 sorting out the signals coming in.  They could not state exactly
                 where this was taking place, and gave the impression they were far
                 more concerned in making it work clinically than in gathering  tech-
                 nical information.  They maintained that after it became operatio5nal,
                 there would be enough time to find out why it works.

                      Dr. Sclioskovsky, who is respoii.@;il)le for clectro-aiiestliesia  at
                 the First Medi c a I Institute  of  Moscow,  is  an  anesthesiologist.  lie
                 and Dr. Schaskov,  the  chief  of  anesthesiology  at  the  Institute  met
                 with me after the papers were given.
                      We spent much time discussing medication during electro-
                 ane2sthesia.  Because  of  difficulty  with  interpretation  we  could   not
                 get  together  on  what  we  were  talking  about.  Interestingly   enough,
                 when we left the iiistitute  the  doctors  were  quite  adept  at  English
                 and  we  then  were  successful  in  exchanging  information.  The  insti-
                 tute has  been  using  the  "interfering  current"  for  approximately  one
                 year in over 350  operations  to  date,  altho2ugh  they  only  reported  on
                 200. They are quite  satisfied  with  it,  but  would  like  to  have  easier
                 methods  of  inducing  electro-anesthesia,  and  felt  some  more  advanced
                 wave form might  bring  about  the  desired  results  with  less  physiolog-
                 ical change than is presently the case.  At this time they use between
                 70-100 ma  on  each  pair  of  electrodes.  They  monitor  the  resulting
         2        wave form from  the  patient  with  an  oscilloscope.  They  do  not  monitor
                 output of the  instrument.  I  explained  we  were  mixing  our  wave  form
                 in the machine, and  they  stated  that  this  defeated  the  entire  purpose
                 of the mix; in other words the  brain  must  be  forced  to  do  the  work.
                 I expressed a desire  to  see  the  instrument  in  operation  if  possible,
                 assuming it would  be  used  on2.an  animal,  if  anything.  They  talked  for
                 two or three minutes and said  they  @iould  pick  me  up  the  following
                 morning for a demonstration.
                 SURGERY
                      When I arrived at the  hospital  in  the  morning  I  was  quite  sur-
                 prised to learn the  demonstration  was  to  be  on  a  male  patient.  To
                 me this indicated a  great  deal  of  confidence  in  the  procedure  and
              2   equipment.  They  had  arranged  this  in  a  matter  of  minutes.  The
                 operation scheduled was  the  surgical  removal  of  the  thymus  in  a
                 patient  with  myasthenia  gravis.  The  subject,  a  Soviet  man,  was
                 about 35-40 years  old.  He  was  given  a  very  short-acting  (the  effect
                 laslt-ed only three minutes) curare type drug  and  a  local  in  the  vi-
                 cinity of the  electrodes.  They  said  t2hat  while  they,  on  occaaian@,
                 do give a light  tranquilizer  the  day  before  an  operation,  and  some-
                 times on the same morning,  they  had  not  done  so  in  this  case.  The
                 man was fully awake and  talking  while  I  was  in  the  operating  room.
                 Du iing the three  minute  period  he  was  intubated  and  electrodes  were
                 emplaced.  The  current  was  turned  up  gradually  (automatically   fr2om
                 both oscillators at  one  time)  until  approximately  50  ma  was  reached.
                 The frequencies were 1250  cps  and  1500  cps,  it  apparently  makes  no
                 difference  which  electrodes  carry  which  frequency.  At  this   point
                 (about 5-7 minutes) the  subject's  eyes  were  still  open  but  in  a
                 fixed position.  lie  could  almost  clench  his  fist  on  request.  The
                 current was tu1rned up slowly to 70 ma at which time there was no

                  response on the part of the subject.  Surgery was started approximately
                  20-25 minutes after admission to the operating roo7-..  Respiration  and
                  blood pressure were constantly checked by a  technician.  There  was  a
                  slight rise in blood pressure on induction, but it leveled off shortly.
                  Respiration remained fairly constant, except for the first few minutes
                  while the curare was st2ill in effect, no oxygen was  given  during  the
                  operation.
                       They reported that physiologic accommodation to  the  current  us-
                  ually occured at about 30 minutes and this would be evidenced  by  a
                  slight movement in the hands. it happened at 35  minutes;  at  this
                  point the current was increased by 10 ma. Despite  shouting  by  the
                  anesthesiologist, the patient did not respond in  any  w2ay.  During
                  the course of the operation, which lasted 2 hours and  30  minutes,
                  the current was increased to 150 ma. The  instrument  being  used  was
                  one of their old prototypes and they claimed to have  newer  and  vastly
                  improved models at the Research Institute which would do a much better
                  job. Dr. Schaskov was not sure of the amount  of  current  really  being
                  used, and after looking 2at the condition of the machine  I  could  share
                  his opinion. He apologized, saying that it was all  set  up  so  quickly
                  for me that they didn't have time to get the  other  instrument  back.
                  They have much information about the values needed, so  were  not  con-
                  cerned.
                       At the conclusion df the operation the current  was  gradually
                  lowered and when it reached approximately 20 ma  the  s2ubject  started
                  to blink his eyes. The instrument was turned off  and  within  two  min-
                  utes  the patient would obey directions to look to the  left  or  right
                  with  his eyes. At five minutes his eyes were clear  and  at  10  minutes
                  he  could answer questions verbally. Saliva  became  a  severe  problem
                  shortly after termination and atropine  was  administered.  The  endo-
                  tracheal tu2be was left in place during the saliva  difficulties  and
                  was removed at about the 10 minute mark at which point  the  problem
                  had been corrected. He was quickly-returned to  his  room  and  placed
                  on the electro-sleep machine.-- I questioned this since I had  been
                  told 20 treatments were necessary for therapeutic value.  They replied
                  that it was not necessary in this type of case, they  just  wanted 2 to
                  relax the individual, and that when the subject was  in  a  deteriorated
                  condition the electro-sleep seemed to have more effect.
                       I saw him again the following morning, and through  the  inter-
                .,.-preter he said he did not feel or remember anything. The  doctors
                  said a few people claim to remember events and five individuals
                  (of the 200) reported headaches the following0 day.  They  also  re-
                  ported two cases of post-operative shock which they  attributed  to
                  surgery rather than the anesthesia. They  were  not  at  all  convinced
                  one could remember anythino after surgery, but thought it  could  be
                                             C2
                  imagination  stating they get an even higher percentage  who  claim
                  to remember events after sur-ery with conventional anesthesia.

                                                                                     13
                    In discussion after the operzition, the followin- points were
                                                                     0
                 brought out by Dr. Kuzin: lie feels relaxation is generally  as  good
                 as what they get with ether inhalation or intravenous  anesthesia  or
                 combinations of both. They have performed prac2tically  all  types  of
                 surgery, including abdominal. The  nor-adrenalin  value  is  slightly
                 higher than with ether, the cortico-steriod level is the same as
                 with drugs.  A slight rise in blood pressure is usually seen.  He
                 feels electro-anesthesia is indicated in all liypotensive cases,  and
                 agrees that hypertensive individuals should be tranquilized, or
                 given the standard pre-anesthesia treat2ment which is normally carried
                 out. He stated that their new machine is used normally at  one  site,
                 and receives considerable usage. They are having another  built  with
                 capacity for 200 ma.
                     When I asked how they secure *iolunteers for this  procedure,  he
                 stated they mav use the instrument on anyone in the hospital  and  no
                 permission is @equired.  He said it is a teaching institutio2n and
                 patients are eager to go there because they know the  finest  doctors
                 are on the staff, preferring it tD the new hospitals for that reason.
                 He stated that the patients respected and trusted the  physicians  to
                 use the best treatment and methods for their cases.  He  pointed  out
                 further that very few unfavorable resul:ts were reported by the patients.
                     He said the procedure'is still being 2evaluated, and will  be  for
                 some time to come. He hopes with more refinements they  may  be  able
                 to get away from any nor-adrenalin change, etc. He stated  in  answer
                 to a question that there was opposition from some doctors  @4ho  just
                 didn't like the use of electricity in any form, but  that  since  all
                 the directors were in favor of it, they had no choice but to go along.
                 SL12.iARY
                      In the Soviet Union there are presently three institutions
                 using electro-anesthesia for human subjects.  Two  of  these   insti-
                 tutions are located in Moscow and the  third  in  Kiev.  Humans  have
                 had surgery performed while under electro-anesthesia since 1960,
                 but the discovery of "interfering current" with the use of four
                 electrodes two years ago has brought it along more 2quickly since
                 then. Over 350 patients have been operated on at  the  First  Medical
                 Institute-of Moscow using this method.  Practically all types of
                 surgery have been performed, although the best results  are  obtained
                 where there is hypotension.
                      Conjunctive drugs, such as curare, are  used  if  needed.  Tran-
                 quilizers are given quite often the day before and  the  day  of  the
              6   surgery, if the surgeon or anesthesiologist feels they are indicated.
                      Nor-adrenalin and cortico-steriod levels are  raised  from  pre-

                                                                                           1 4
                   operative valties. The tise t)f direc- ctirreiit lt@ts I)eeti t%.ilally zil)iiii-
                   d@iied becatise of morpliologiczil cltatii,,es t)cctiring ill Lile lriiii-i; titcy
         2          liave not fotind these changes using the "interfering ctirretit".
                        1, despite being tip to date on all work being d(iiie in  this
                   country, could add absolutely nothiiig to their  knowledge  of  the
                   field. The only area 4nere I was aliead of them  came  in  the  re-
                   cording of EEG during electro-anestliesia2. They have  not  been  stic-
                   cessful in doing this as yet and are quite anxious to get any in-
                   formation I can supply.
                        Other than the actual operation  itself  the  most  impressive
                   thing was the quick manner in which  it  was  arranged.  No  backup
                   material was evident, and the surgeons showed complete confidence
                   in the technique. I feel it was significant  that  they  were  so 2 willing
                   to allow me to observe their technique  that  they  did  everything  pos-
                   sible to give me all the assistance I wished.  I  was  in  the  operating
                   room from the time the patient was brought in until  he  was  taken  to
                   his room post-surgery. I am  100%  convinced  the  only  anesthetic  used
                   was electro-anesthesia.
                   GENERAL REMARKS
                        It is my 2impression that   in the Soviet Union electro-sleep  is  an
                   established form of thera'y.   This is not yet the case  in  other  Buro-
                                             p
                   pean countries which I visited, where there is a  great  deal  of  in-
                   terest but not enough results reported  to  justify  any  conclusions  as
                   yet.
                        The fact that workers  in electro-sleep are  having  2difficulty  ac-
                   quiring financing from the  government, while those  engaged  in  electro-
                   anesthesia are not, reflects the official  attitude.  While  it  would  be
                   easy to deduce from this that the  Soviets  do  not.feel  electro-sleep
                   is worth any more money, I do not believe this to be the case.  Rather,
                   I feel it indicates the thought that money should not be channeled into
                 2  an established method, but should go to research in other fields.
                        It would not be difficult to  dismiss  electro-sleep  as  another
                   form of "quackeryll,and indeed this has been done in  the  United  States;
                   however.I must accept the fact that  all  the  scientists,  surgeons  and
                   psychiatrists to whom I addressed myself  seem  honestly  convinced  of
                   the routine use of this form of the1rapy.  It  is  inconceivable  to  me
                   that they are all mistaken.
                        There is a very sharp delineation between  workers  in  the  field
                   of sleep and anesthesia. While each is  generally  aware  of  what  the
                   other is doing, at no time  would  scientists  engaged  in  investigating
                   one field talk about the other.

                             My impression from tzilkin,,, wltli di)ctt)rs ;tttendiiip, Llic conference
                       itt the In.,;LittiLe is tliiit                        wi,l). he tiged in  mziny
                       Stiviet liospi.t@ils in Lti(! ticit         ftittire.  Tlicre @tvt- Lwti niiiin ftraw-
                       biicks aL the present tinte.      First, not en,.)tit!,Ii tnesLiiesiol(-,gists  are
                       trained in this method, and       second,  Llie  instritment@itit,)n  is  not  yet
                       generally available.  While       "electroiohn" has been released for pro-
            2           duction, the electro-anesthesia apparatus has not.  Since it is still
                       in the area of experimentation this.may take some time.  It is of
                       course  difficult  to   justify   training   personnel   to   use   equipment,   if
                       the equipment will not be readily available.
                             The  trip  made  me  more  aware  than  ever  of  the   need   for   improved
                       channels  of   commun2ication   in   the   scientific   community.   In   the   spe-
                       cific   field   of-electro-anesthesia   it   could   possibly   have   saved   uev-
                       eral  years  of  work,  which  mu-st  be  regarded   as   almost   fruitless,   if
                       the   information   gathered   is   correct.   This   lack   of   communication
                       has  permitted  our  scientists  to  work  iong   hours   using   a   Soviet   ap-
      2                 proach to the problem of electro-anesthesia, which the Soviets aban-
                       doned as completely unworkable four years ago.  Brain damage as a
                       result of its use has been proved.
                             The  possibility  was  discussed   of   setting   up   a   central   location
                       for  collection  of  data  on  a-monthly  or   quarterly   basis,   and,   at   the
                       -very  least,   sending   out   a  2 bulletin   abstracting   current   information.
                       The  Soviets  were  most  enthus-iastic  about   cooperating   in   such   a   ven-
                       ture.  I feel this could be of tremendous assistance to our programs
                       and  should  be  followed  up.,  If  this  type  of   program   would   work   out
                       successfully  in  this  field,  perhaps  it   would   be   adopted   in   other
                       areas also.
               2              I  feel  it  would  also  be  in  our  best  interests  if  we   could   de-
                       velop  some   sort   of   coordination   and   information   exchange   between
                       groups  in  this  country.  Natilrally   we   could   not   interfere   with   ori-
                       ginal  research,  but   perhaps   if   knowledge   was   diageminated   more   ra-
                       pidly  and   accurately   between   scientists,   the   work   would  4 prooress
                       more quickly.
                       July 2, 1965

