                                                                                    --?142 3
                                                 1) R tL F T
                     In cooneration wi.ti.                                      esires    to
                test a new AEZT.ICIIGIZ- technique.  The technique  does not  require    the
                high security considerations utiiized by i@RTICliO@l to-an    on  its   iast
                visit in that  the  application  of  the  technique  to  the  subject  takes
                  ac e unde i@ pe rf e c tly normal c i rcums tance s .71 tliout- the s ub j e ct be iri6-
                p@
                aware o-e the applicatidn of the techniqiie.  There are no if ter effects.
                It is desired tl@at a minimum of 102 ,,-Ilbjects be found for t--,gting purpoo,--s.
                The subject,-3 should be persons -nho are suspected of hi,,,ing more iiformation
                tliaintlaey have dividged to date.  I'ney @hould lia-;e a motivation for decep-
                tion for )TiWioldinr, of inform-ation.  They should be persons 'aho liave L2-,-,eii
                previously Uioroughly in-terrogated by case officers ant those case officers
                siioiild be avaiiable to conduct the int@orrogation durink- ',,he application
                of the technique arid in the position to deter,-,une eiliether the z-,ubject
                reveals informalioii hitherto unclisclosed as a resuit of t.2,iis @xclinLqur-3.
                Team mefnbers @lill not be present duriiii   @he course of 'Uhe interrogation
                but ,vill observe and monitor the interrogation to detenta'ne reactions
                of the subject, psyrlio,Logica.1 behaviour, i-r-(iical reactions and o'ulier
                a-opccts of this type of  interrogation.  Sug2,,estcd  t@l-)cs  of  sub4cr-ts
                rniglit be certai                                     iontific personnel
                recently returned f                and agents or indigenous personnel
                uluiiized by the operauons in 'Uhe field.
                      q'lie Icnc;vilecIFc of this ti2rlitij-qiie ,;Iic)ul(i ho   only to
                senior official3 in a position  to  produce  subjecl@'s  describe@i  abo-;e.
                In addition  kno;Tied e of telm aetivities @liould bc restricted to the
                mininnm number of persons rieces3ary.

                                                       W'      ill -liarg-        tca:fi
                  act as liaison poiiit Yjitli stiticn pp-r.,3onnel.  5iipport in the form of
                  facilities and. otlier agristance @,,ill be requircd
                  4iid              K;USE ISEUDO).  It is de@-2ir-ed that subjects be selected
                  in order that -Uie tean arrival on approxinately 16 i'              pcr--it
                  irimediate processini@_, of t-he subjects selected                   arrive
                  xn a fcw-davs in advance of the team to confirin arrangements and prep.-Lre
                  the schedules of intei;rpgationo and the conditions iuidci, v;liich tliosc
                  interrogationsnill be carried out.
                                                         2
               I IBMall

