                                          latiuary 1.1, 1966,
                  Dear Dr.
                  As a follow-up to our conversation             i am atta ebin- an
                  outline of a proposed research project designed (a) to elurijate
                  th'e phvsiological mechanisri-l(s) underlying the electiodermal
                  response, and (b) based on such information to d2eteri7nine
                  procedure for maximizing the information content of recordings
                  from this system.
                  Since this represents only an informal proposal, I have attached
                  only an approximate schedule of costs. I would expect these costs,
                  includi,n- overhead, to amount to between
                  one year.  The project would be handled a@r@i1nistratively zhr.ouc,,h
                  the Business Office
                                                                  Approved for c-al!2-2@a
                                                                  I)ate   2 7

                  Page' 11
                  january.1-1, 1965
                                                    'k Any official correspondence iii
                  connection with pc)ssible negotiation of a                   r-i
                                                            _grant or conti:act ay be
                  addressed to
                  If vou require clarification or modification of various aspezts of t2his
                  proposal, please feel free to contact me furtl-ier.
                                                      Sinc-erely yours,

                                         Liforiiial Pi:oposal
                            P@-'-YSIOLOGICAL MECHAiNlSivIS UNDERLYL'@G
                                 THE ELCCTROI)ER,VIAL RESPOINSE

                      Physiological Mechanisms LJnderlying the Electrodermal Response
                  LNITRODUCTION
                       The manifold uses to which electrodermal measurement has becn applied
                  testify to the respect held by a large nurnlcr of investigators for its potential
                  information content.
                       Vari.@us measures of this exquisitely sensitive system have, in fact, been
        2          used for several -decades, hopefully, as indices of "emotio-:al" activity.
                       On the ot.her hand the highly controversial state of this area, and the
                  distrust with -,vhiz:h it is viewed by an equal number of competent investigators,
                  are indications of major lacunae existing in this field of knowledge.  In recent
                  years several lines of evidence have to an exten2t revealed the explanation for this
                  lack of ao-reemertt; namely that the electrodermal response amplitude and base
                  level are multi-de@,ermined by a combination of relatively independent systems
                  which combine in varying proportions according to the nature of the behavior
                  takinc, place, A-nong systems experimentally implicated in this response are the
                  sweat gland sec:7etory vlbule, the sweat gland duct, an epidermal barrier layer, the
                  corneum and cutaneous blood vessels. Within these systen-Ls there are controversies
                  over the nature of the physiological change giving rise to thE! electrical chan-C.
                  There is, furthermore, much ar,-,ument over the relation bet@veen conductance
                  measures and passive potential measures. Are these in fact i6ndependent as
                  recently evidenced or are they different manifestation of a zommon process as
                  claimed by a group of equally responsible investigators? If r-hev are independent,

                                                                                       AML
                                                      -2-
                 how do they interacc? Is it possible that the slin potential response is in part
                 of vascular ori-ini
                       Besides the limitation on our capability for meaningful, quantitative
                 conversion of elec@rodernial d-.ta presented by this in2adequate knowledge, it
                 also prevents valicl interpreatation on a psychological basis. If  our  inferences
                 regarding higher level nervous (and emotional) activity of an individual are
                 &a@vn from obser,;aCLon of his adaptive behavior, we must  obviously  be  able  to
                 recognize the type of adaptation he is using.  Cutaneous activity may biologically
                 repres2ent a preparati6n for aggressive muscular action, defense or flight or for
                 information intake. The recent demonstration that the GSR iE augi-nented on the
                 side of the body involved in a muscular maneuver (33) lends further weight to its
                 interpretation as adaptive behavior. The Ij-kely n-kechanisms involved in tfie
                 various responses are vasomotor 2activity, thermal Eweatino, mechanical
                 (moisturizing) sweating, water conservation  (reabsorption)  or  sensitization  of
                 peripheral receptors. Recognition  of  the  particular  systems  activated  should
                 enable qualitative identification of the gross behavior.
                 STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM
                        In using electrodermal activity as an indicator of central nervous system
                 response to e1xternal stimuli, one would hope that its output can be in some manner
                 calibrated in terms of quality as well as intensity of neural activilv for use  in
                 qualitative as well as quantitative evaluation of central state. Distortions or lack

                                                       -3-
                 of reliability in this indicator can arise as a consequence of unacceptable
                 technique or error in "neural calibration", that is in failure to recognize the
                 cbnsiderations tc. be used in transforming from changes in conductance or
                 potential to changes in central outflow. While our understan-ding of the
                 principles of technique of m2easuiement has already advanced to a point at
                 which it need no Ion-er const@tute a major source of error, the same can not
                 be said for our knowledc,,e of the underlying phvsiological system or systems.
                 Insofar as each primary suspected component (i, e. sweat gland, epidermis or
                 vasculature) implies a @iifferent type of adaptive behavior, a--id insofar as they
                 may in2teract in @uch a way as to present spurious information regarding the
                 behavior of the individual, it is proposed that efforts shall bz! devoted to
                 elucidation of the responsible systems and the means of separation. Partcular
                 attention will be paid to the potential measure which, because of its partially
                 con-Lbiiied positive and negative components with their apparent stimulus response
       2           )ecificitv, haxl a higher information than the conductance :7esponses which are
                 al@,vays unidirectional. In general the project will be directed tonvard calibration
                 of electrodermal activity in terms of specific tvpes and intensities of neural activity
                 by el@ucidation of the various underlying mechanisms and their quantitative inter-
                 relations.
                        In the fo6llowing discussion the entire group of reflex responses, whether
                 thev be chano-e of resistance oy@ conductance or a positive, iegative or biphasic
                 change in potential, will be collectively referred to as electrodermal acr-ivit:y.

               The galvanic skin response or skin conductance response will be abbreviated
               SCR and skin potential response, SPR.
               EXPERIMENTAL BACKGROUIND
               Areas of At7reet'nent
                      There are several areas in which ekperimental evidence is currently in
               general a-reemerit. Only key references are cited for each. (ivlany other aspects
               which have been experi2mentally demonstrated but not yet generally accepted are
               omitted). Areas of agreement are as follows:
                       1. That the electrodermal reflex depends on a sympethetic nervous
               supply (1)
                       2. That it is cholinergic, beiny completely blocked ty the iontophoretic
                introduction of atropine (2).
                       3. That the sweat gland is functionally involved, at least in part, in this
                reflex (3).
                       4.  That zhere is not a simple relation between sweat production and
                resistance change (4).
                        5. That amplitude of the resistance response falls off with increasing
                frequency of the excitation current (5).
                        6. That the resistance response can be potentiated or alten@iated by
         3       various mild agents to which the skin surface is exposed (6).
                        7. That skin resistance is an apparent resistance, .vhich in large part
                 derives from a Dolarization pocential (7).

                    S. 'niat the "resistincc" level falls witli increasinrr current strength
            (6, 8).
                    9. That the --esistarce respolise and tl-ic negative SPR persist for a
            considerable period after arterial occlusion, while the positive nave is reduced (9).
                   10. That skin resistance falls with increasin2- temperatures (10).
                   11. That vascular reacxes have little effect on the skin iesistance
             response (11).
                   12. That tlie -GSR may be elicited by stimulation of area .5 of the pre-motor
             cortex which utilizes the pyramidal tract as a descendincr patiiway, or by stimulation
             of portions of the hypotha-Famus or midbraln reticular forrratior-.. These two pathxvavs
             are separate (12).
             Controi,ersies Posedbv Experimental Findinc,
                     There are several basic contradictions or areas of uncertainity implied by
              other e.\perimental data:
                      1. Skin potential resoonses (SPR) and skin conductance responses (SCR or
              GSR) had been considered by most workers.
               2     as derived from the same functioning system. Both are eliminated by cliolinergic
              block@@o- agents (1'-J) -I they are highly correlated and are of hit@.est amplitude on the
              pal.-nar and plantar surfaces (11-11).  i,,Ievertheless, hich SPR activity, without any
               SCR activity, has been found by               on the nail bed.  FurLherrnore,
      4                      has provided electrical and pliarmacolo-ical evidence for the indepeident
                                                                                                    MESON&-,

                                                                   been able to abolish
               origin of Lliese effcz:ts.
               SPR but riot OSR by cx5ariguination.
                     2. Tile swcat gland has long been considct,-d as the source of
               electrodermal aceivity. Yet the nail bed noted above contaiti@- no sweat glands
               but produces potential responses ver2y similar in form and occurrence to  those
               from nearby skin. Furthermore, the output of sweat (vapor) from ti-le skin has
               been shown under many circumstances to bear little relation to the level of
               electrodermal activity (4). It has also been possible using microelectrodes to
               obtain GSR's from slal5s of epidermis which ha%,-e been sur-ically and electrically
               isolated 2from adjacent sweat glands (18).
                     3. Both the positive and negative comr,,)nents of the SP-@ are abolished by
               atrooine or hyoscvamine and are considered by many to be cornponents of a sinale
               process (19). Ho@vever, the positive component is more sensitive  to  ischemia (9).
                                     found only negative rf-sponses from the
           2    In the cat,l                                                  sweat c,,Iands, positive
               only from nearby epidermis.  imorcover, reflp-x absorption of water throuo-h the skin
               (probably epidermal) is associated with the positive wave of the SPR (21). Tnere is
               evidence for a stimulus response specificity in the positive and negative @vaves in
               r-hat posizive respo2nses are associated @\,ith alert aoal-oriented behavior (22). The
               negative wave appears to be relatively non-specific. The positive and necrative waves
               also respond differentially to temperature cliange (23).
                       4. The s@in conductance response h@is been renerally assumed to  be  a
               single entity (12), but niucli evidence supports Elie vienv that iL 9depends on L-,vo

                                                       -7-
                 clifferent coiiiponc@its (24).  Wliilc the evidence for two coniporcnes under
                 separate control is strong, the case for the epidermis as one of these is
                 presently on shal,-y grounds, especially as a result of the findings on the nail
                 bed. The most likel2y alternative is another type  of  sweat  gla7nd,  presumably
                 tlieri-nal, since the palmar and plantar sweat glands are primarily non-ti-iermal
                 (25).
                       3.  The almost abandoned notion that the SCR is produced by the
                 increased conductivity of the corneum as it becomes permeated by a coaductin-
                 electrol@rtes (sweat) ha's been revived by, 2       @on excell-ent experimental
                 4orrounds. Postula--ion of a water barrier within the  corneum  allows  retention
                 of this hypothesis in the face of the observation that SCR's occur even in skin
                 soal,-ing in NaCl.        has argued that the inability of his r-@iodel to explain
                 many of the mernbraftl-like properties of the skin  is  easily  cixcumvented  by
                 assuming that the corneum  itself  may  have  membrafte-like  pi-operties  which
                 change -,vith hydration or electrolyte content (27).
                 Alteriiative '.\,Iodels
                        Several models of the electrodermal effector system are sugc@.-ested by
                 the e%lderimental data and each of these wit'i be used as a tes!- v4ehicle for
                 interp3:etation of experimental results in the proposed study.  'Die consistancy of
                 experimental results with each of these models will be considered in an effort to
                 arrive at the most probable system.

                   The actual sys@,em may be, and likely is, a composite of t@,,o or more
           functional systems which may be listed for convenience as follows:
           A.  "lie Sweat Gland
                    1.  'D-ie sweat gland body may undergo permeability cfiangcs ivhich
            account for conductan-ce or potential changes.
                    2. The sweat  gland  duct  may  undergo  permeability  chang:@s  which  account
            for conductance change or potential change of the same or dif4@erent nature as in (1),,
                    3.  The sweat gland duct may fill partially or completely and thereby create
            a channel'of high conductivity. 'Mis in itself would normally cause only a concluctance
             chanue, but in reducing the internal resistance of tike sweat cland "generator"2, v-,)uld
             result in a crreat contribution of sweat gland potential to total sk:-n porential.
                     4. There is likely an active  reabsorption  process  occurring  in  the  sweat
             duct and tli'As may be associated with characteristic potential waves.
                     3. Sweat gland secretion may function in moisturizing t@ie corneum to protect
              it against abrasion durina anticipate2d activity.  It may alternatively function in
              thermoregulation in anticipation of a heat load. :17he level of this latter  function
              would in all likelihood depend on the general state of thermosta-sis.
              B.  The Corneum
                       The corneu-n may act as a series resistor whose value is altered by
               degree of hydration occasioned by'sweat glands and possibly epidermal transp,,..-a2tion.
               C. Tt@e Epidermis
                       1. The epidermis  may  behave  as  a  capacitor  of  essentiallv  unchanging
                structure in paralkel with the sweat c,rland.  Lealage of this capacitor n-iav be

                                                       -9-
                   insignificant or it could account for a conductance even exczedlng that of the
                   sweat glands.
                         2.  It.may behave as a barrier whose pertneability is altered relatively
                   slowly by humo-ral mechanisms.
                         3. It -my behave as a barrier whose permeability -s reflexly altered.
                   Th2is alteration may
                                a) function in insensible perspiration
                                    function in reabsorprion of water secreted by the sweat gla-nds
                                 c) be a- by-product of the,- release of a chemical mediator by
                                    nerve endin-8 whose function is to sensitize tactile receptors (28).
                         4. It rray behave as a double-lavered2  barrier,  the  outer  layer  contributing
                   to the base potential and base conductance but static in nati-ire, the inner one also
                   contributing but subject to reflexly induced changes in perrneability and therefore
                   responsible in part for the GSR and SPR (23).
                   D.  Blood Vessels
                          1. Alteratio--i in blood volui-ne is known to contribute to conductivity2
                   chane-es, though normally to an  insignificant  degree.  in  some  cases,  namely  when
                       0
                   electroderrnal activity is of low level and the i-issue is highly vascular, this  could
                   represent a significant relative effect.
                          2. Srn.:)oth muscle activity, either arterial, arteri-olar or venous2constitute
                   another source of potential. 5Inhibition could cive rise to a different  potential  than
                   contraction.

                                                       -iO-
                 E XPE R L\.[ E NTA L APPR OA CH
                        AEtention will be given to possible resolution in the troregoing areas of
                 controversy or uncerr-aincy.         primary questions may  be  used  as  the  basis
                 for formulation of research efforts:
                        1. Does the skin conductance response  depend  upon  activity2  in  the  sweat
                 gland alone, or d,:)es it (in addition) depend upon activity in an epidermal laver or
                 in blood vessels.
                        2. Do the positive and negative components  of  the  skin  potential  response
                 depend upon activity iri separate areas, e. @,-. sweat crland and epidermis (or blood
                 vessel) or do they simply represent two phases of a process  in  a  single  2effector
                 organ?
                        3. Which comporient, epidermal or vascular     )most likely account:s for  the
                 skin potential responses observed in a sweat cland-free area such as the nail-bed?
                        4. What is the biological  (psychological)  significance  of  each  component?
                 Are they qualitat-@vely different? Do they vary in sensitivity?
                        5. How do separate elements 2in the  skin,cornbine  to  account  for  a  -iven
                 conductance level or a given potential? To Nvhat extent  are  elements  in  parallel
                 and in series, ar-d to what extent does the internal  resistance  of  one  component
                 influence the manifestation of activity in another? What is the most rational approach
                 to the correction of observed response amplitude for differe-@ices  in  base  level?
                 ,8Meti-tod
                         Each of the above postulated mechanisms represents a tar-et for
                 exper,mental evaluation as to its actual role in the clectroclermal reflex. -\s

                 the tenabilicy of each of these is experimentally indicated, attl-ntion will be
                 given to the relative macmitude of contribution both to bas@- le,.rel and response
                 amplitude, and to the manner in which its contribution interacts with contribution
                 of the other components. Li each case skin conductance, skin potential, SCR and
                 SPR will be simul:aneously observed for quantitative t2est of interaction effects as
                 well as consistancy with eacti proposed model. Specific e plriments designed to
                 aid in the answer to each primary question are outlined belo@v.
                       1.  Is the sweat gland alone involved in the skin conductance response?
                              a) Microelectrode experiments based on the isolated epidermal
                 slab technique (18) will be continued in an2 effort to establish whether the observed
                 SCR activity is real or is an artifact of sweat gland activity. This will primarily
                 involve close examination of phase and wave-forrn reiacions of simultaneous
                 recordings from the slab and nearby sweat glands.
                               b) All sweat glands in aL micro field will be selectively inactivated
                 by the iontophoret;-c introduction of silver ion (me2thod already established by
                 principal investioator) and observations made of recordino-S from this area and
                 from nearby intact areas.
                               c) Efforts will be made to selectively reduce pick-up from non-
                 sweat gland areas by infiltration of the upper layers of the corneum with paraffin.
                 Preli-ninary experiments reveal that sweat glands continue to secrete after this
          1       procedure. Thu; effect of this treatrnerit on conductance and on conductance response
                 %@Fill be examined.

                                                      12-
                             d) Ttie average sweat glaiicl (microclectrode) respons,- amplitude
              and resistance level- from a 0.3 cm  2 field will be compared with that from a
              simultaneously recc-rded macroscopic site by a sarnpling tecliiiique. Total sweat
              gland count will also be made in this delineate2d area. A gros-s electrode will @--lien
              be applied to t[iis field and the magnitude of response and resistance level compared
              with that calculated from the individual data.  Discrepancies  will  be  examined  for
              indications of non-sweat activity.
                             e) E.%-perimental milla'ria will be used to block sweat crlands
              selectively.  This method,2                                involves stiin@alation of
              keratin formation at the s@veat pore bv use of 1-iich currents. Affected areas will
              be compared with a:ijacent sweating areas.
                              f) Atropine has been shown to block all SCR activity  but  the  effect
              is inconclusive for resolution of the present ciuestion since other effectors may
              also be cholin2ercric. Pilocarpine induces  profuse  sweating  and  may  be  considered
              to raise sweat gland output to a maximal level. Therefore any alteration in skin
              resistance after iontoplioretic introduction of pilocarpine (')O), may  be  considered
              as probably non-sudomotor. However, the complete abolition of electrodermal
              response would be somewhat inconclusive for the same reasons as stated for
              atr6opine.
                              g) The sweat gland may be having  an  indirect  but  important  effect
              on SCR amplitude hy virtue of the induced cliange in corneal hy:iration as postulated

                                                  -13-
                             if lie is correct, one should c%pect SCR aml)litude to be jtist
            by:
            as large with a cons@,ant current system as witli a conseant 'voltage system even
            in,itli a relatively "dry" electrolyte such as 0. 1 i'\,--Cl in 90 per cent -lycerol; If
            chanae in hydration is relati2vely minor the constant voltage system will result
            in diminished ainplit-ide, owing to a si,-nificant loss of the "cons@ant" voltage
            across the non-varyina corneal resistor.
                    2. Do the positive and negative components of the SPR originate in
             separate sites? Because of unavoidable electrical leak-s one can aINvays expect
             contamination of signals in one area bv those in the adjacent area. Results of
             microelect-rode surveys will therefore be su,,-estive rather than definitive.
             Moreover, the positive and negative components, though slightly out of phase,
             are to a crreat extent fused and subject to partial cancellation. In fact a positive
             wave may occur N@,@ithout the combined wave ever croing positive (31). Resolution
             of the t@,vo2 components is understandably difficult.
                             a) Experiments on epidermal slabs (microelectrode) previot-,sly
              confined to conductance measurements will be extended to potential measure-neats.
              Wave forms from the t@vo areas will be examined for predominance of either polariey.
                             b) The effect of Ag' i:,qctivation of the sweat gland on rnicroelecrrode
              w0ave J'orms of response from various areas will be determined.
                              c) The application of an e-,ternal load (shunt) will be used to determine
               whea-ler the internal resistance of the positi-,,e and negative ge-icrators are different.

                                                 -14-
              If the two waves are diffcrencially attelluaccd wlicn a low resistance Sliunt is
              used, this would be cvidence for diffc3:cnt internal resistances of these two
              components and tiercfore for different sites. It would be important to rule out
              tcmpc,ral ch@-an,z-,res in the impedance of a sin-le acnerator, as an alternative
              explanation. This w.:)uld be done by comparing the magnitude of -any difference in
              the' internal resistance with the maximum variation in total resistance observed
              durin- the response. This latter can be determined by  a  simultaneous  writeout
              of resistance using i 5 mv, low frequency AC source (32).
                 2           d) The'report by.              that high current density differentially
              affects the positive and negative components of the SPR will be @ollowed up by a
              microelectrode study. Hi(,h currents will be applied selectively to sweat :,-Ian&-
              and -,ion-sweat crland areas to determiiie whether the waves frorn these are
              differentially affected by this treatment.
                2     3. Are the potential responses observed from the nail bed epidermal or
              vascular in oricrin?
                            a) The nail will be exposed to electrolytes such as  1 "L\4 CaC'2' L-iown
              to have a marked e-@fect on SPR amplitude on the skin. It is very unlikely that this
              agent is exertinc, any effect on blood vessels.
                             b) Vascular changes of short duration will be ir-iposed by the use of
              ,venous and arterial cuffs and the effect on SPR will be noted. ',,Iaturally occurrina
              vascular response in the nail bed, monitored bv the reflectanc- pler-Liysrno,-raph,
              will l@e compared with the simultaneously monitored SPR. The same @vill be done
              on cori,,.-citional skin sitc-s.1

                                                                                             --7
                             c) The plia):rnacologic cxpcj:illlents by
                which discounted the role of vascular respoiises in tJ'c SCR will be c-,.@tended
                to SPR measuremen:s.
                             d) 2'r-ic nail bed will be punctured to determine -,vliether  SPRs
                are still observable under the epidermis.
                      4. What is the biological significance of each compotienr found?
                              a) Does the sweat criand secretion represent ant-cipation of a
                tliermal load or does it serve primarily for moisturizing the s@-in or are both
                functions i2nvolved? T@e auidincr hypothesis in this case is that both types of
                s,,ve,--t c-lands function separately and accordincr to the demands of the anticipated
                act.  It is further hv
                                   ,pothesized that in a well  inte-rated  orcaiiism,  thermal
                s-,veatina should be associated with cutaneous vasodilatation. Special attention
                wil2l therefore be given to areas or to instances in which  the  electrode-rmal
                r@@spa,ise is associated with dila.tation as opposed to the vasoconstricti.on more
                commonly occurring.  SPRs and SCRs respectii,ely associated with tiiese will be
                examined for characteristic differences. The effect of ambient thermal conditions
                on each will be examined.
                               b) Is 0the positive ,vave of tl-ie SPR cavsally related to epidermal
                absorption or transpiration of water as previously indicated (21)? Clarification
                of this relationship will be obtained by observing tl-ie concomitant effects of ischemia
                on ilie t)ositive SPR and reabsorption activity; similarly for ti-ie effects of Iii<,,-h
                current density.

                              c) What is die relationship of activity of specific electrodermal
                components to tactile sensitization? In a previous study (28) althougii there was
                a significant reladon between skin conductance response and change in tactile
                threshold, there were many SCRs not associated with a tactiie chance. If there
                is, in fact, a peripheral sensitizing mechanism as previously pos2tulated, it is
                possible that the threshold chance is associated with one of the t-@vo components
                of the SPR. Tactile thresholds will be determined in conjunction with skin
                potential recordings. The separation of positive and negative potentials wiU be
                aided by the use of a newly developed electronic analyzer.
                      5. What are the principles of summation and interaction between compone2nt
                mechanisms and what rationale is indicated for correction of response amolitude
                for base-line differences?
                              a) The approach to this ivill depend on future methods developed
                to obtain separate measurement of the activity of each component. Such measure-
                ments will be applied to test the validity of various physiolog-cal and circuit models
                of tl,.e integrated syste2m. Among these methods, may be-
                                      1) Measurement of SPR from the finger nail and from nearby
                skin. The differential factor here would be sweat gland acti-v-ity.
                                      2) Selective block of sweat glands by A -Lor experimental
                                                                             9'
                miliaria.
                                      3) @&1croelectrode sampling of an entire skin field (sweat
                gland and non-snveat gland areas).

                                     4) Simultaneous measurement of SCR and SPf, from
                nvo equal areas havin- a different sweat gland count.
                                     5) Measurement of vapor under standard conditions
                when the sweat alands are nonfunctioning, and when they are secreting.
                Simultaneous observatioii of SPR and SCR would be made.
                              b) The combined an2alysis of SCR and SPR data with the use of
                enter-nal shunts to determine the respective cenerator impedances will be
                used in an effort to build a unified model.
                              c) The predicted peripheral relation of response amplitude to
                base level under a variety of conditions will be tested. Relation to central level
                of activation is a separate matter.  Frequentiv central activation is the variable
          2      sought for the indicator being base-line-corrected reflection of neural outflow.
                With this philosophy, it becomes clear that central variation must be avoided in
                this phase. Two methods are sugo,;csted-.
                                      1) Stimulation of the distal smmp of the severed planta--r
                nerve of the cat.  This investigator has already done explorarory experiments in
            2    which base level conductance of the foot pad was brought to a high level by
                repetitive neural stimulation, followed by standard stimuli at 30 second intervals
                as the base conductance gradually fell (recovered) over a thirty minute period.
                These experiments will be continued.
                                      2) Because human skin probably does not behave Qxactly as
                the cat 4oot cad, similar experiments @vill be 3performed on human paraplecic

                patients, using a standard electrical stimulus to the fdot and recording from
                the opposite foot. This spinal reflex system has many of the properties
                described in
                                      3) A final preparation of this nature is the use of a
                nerve block on the hand in the region of the ulna r nerve, with a standard
                                                          stal to this block. using3 surface
                electrical stimulus applied to the nerve di
                electrodes.  Electxodermal responses will be measured from the tip of the fifth
                finger.

                                              References
                                                                               and psycho-alvanic
                   Richter, C. P.  A sCQdy of the electric skin resistanze
                   'reflex in a case of unilaceral sweatina.  Brain,  927, 50:216-235.
             2.    Leva, J.  Uebcr eini.-e ilrperliche Begleitersch@einungen psychischer Voriinge
      2             nit besonderer Ber@&cksichti-ung des psychogalvanische7r Reflex pliinomens.
                   l,funchen. Med.-I@schr., 1913, 60:2386-2389.1
                                                                                     of Chicago
             3.  Rothman , S.  Physiology and Biochemistry of the Skin.  Univ.
                   Press2, Chicago@, 1955.
             4.    Edelber-, R.  Independence of aalvanic skin response amplitude and sweat
                                                      1964, 42:443-448.
                   production.  J. Invest. Dermat.,
             5.    Forbes, T. W. and Landis, C. @The limiting A.C. frequency for the exh-' ition
                                                                                              @b
                   2of the -alvani-c 'Sl@in ("psychIc-alvanic") response.  J, gen. Psychol.,   1935,
                   13:188-193.
             6.  Edelbercr, R., Greiner' T. and Burch, N. R.  Some me,,nbrane properties of
                   the effector in the galvanic skin response.  J. App. Physiol., 1960,
                   15:691-696.
              7.  Gildemeister, X.  Der   sogen annte psycho--al2van4sche Reflex und seine
                   physikalisch-cheriische  Deutuna.   Pfl. Arch. f. d. Ges. Physiol., 1915,
                   162 -.489-506.
              8.  Grings, W. W.    Methodolo-,ical considerations underlying electrodermal
                   measurements.   J. Psychol., 1953, 35:271-282.
              9.  Wilcott, R. C.  Effects of local blood      removal on the skin re0sistance and
                   potential.  17. comp. physiol. Psychol., 1958, 51:295-300.
             10.  @laulsby, R. L. and Edelberg, R.  The interre.lationship between the galvanic
                   S'--in response, basal resistance and ternperatuie     J. comp. physiol. Psychol.,
                   196C), 53-475-479.

                11.  Lad'       F.  aid          J. D.   The                                     ological
                                                             ?sycho-"@-lvanic rcf       a phar7@ac
                     5tudy'of  rl-.e peripi-icral           J. @@ourol. Neurosur-. and Psyciiiat.,
                     1962, @.5.1--,6-133.
                12.  Wang, G@  H.   The galvanic skin reflc%: A review c@f old and recent works
                     from a phy@iologic point of view.  Am. J. Physical ',,led., 1957, 36:295-320
                     and 1958, @-:-7:35-57.
                13.  @%lilcott, R.'..C. The partial independence  of skin pK)teTitial an  s ii res stance
                     from sweatin-    Psyclio6physiology, 1964'   1:55-66.
                14.  Woodworth, R.S. and Schlosber-, H.       Experi,7.ental Psychology.  Holt,
                     Rinehart and Winston, New York, 1964.
                19.  Lloyd, D. P. C.  Action potential     arkId secretory potential of sweat -,lands.
                     Nat. Acad. of Sci. of the U. S. A. Proc., 1961,      4?:351-358.

                                                             7,.iji-,.ori, B. St'-,dies on t'@IC
          -@3.  Yoe-,OLa, T.,        i, T., gondo,       and
                                                                                    urc)piiysiol.
                diphasic wav e tor-n of -.lie galvan4-c skin reflex.  EEG  C14n. Nc-
                J., 1959, 11:2687-696.
          24.   Eclelberc,  R  -nd @,lri@lit, D. J. Two gaivavic skin iesponse efl:ector   oraans
                                     p              Psychophysiolooy, 1964, 1-.39-47.
                and their stiriulus  s  ecificity.
          25.   Kuno, Yas.   Human   Perspiration.  Cliarles C. Thomas, Sp-rinefield, 1956.
           30.2  Gibson, L. E. and Cool,@e, R. E.  A test   for concentrat@-on of electrolytes
                 in sweat in cystic --ribrosis of the pancreas utilizina pilocarpine by
                 iontovhoresis.  Pediatrics, 1959, 23:545-549.'
           31.   -t@al-,-.iquest, D. and Edelber-, R. Probleris in the analysis of the endosonatic
                 -alvanic skin response.  P2sychoDhysiolo-y, 1964, 1:48-54.
            32.  Edelber-, R.  Electrical properties of the skin.  in Brown, C. C. (ed.)
                 I.:,Lethods in 1?s-ychophysioloo.,y, @iilliaris & Wi-l@ins, Balt i--nore, 1965.
                 Culp, @.I. C. and Edelber-, R.  Rec-ional response sdecificity in the electro-
                 der,-,ial reflex.  Submitted for publication, 1965.
                                                      of

              Pcriod of Work
                      This proposal would cover one ycar of effort. It is apparent that this
              is an iiiadoquate pcriod to accomplish all of the experiments described but it
              would be sufficient to complete over half of Jiem. It Nvatild be hoped that
              con[inuation of sup?ort could be negotiated if appropriate, for a secon2d vear
              of effort.
              Amount of Support
                      An approximate estimate of costs is itemized belcw. A fi-.ced fee arant
              or contract would be most desirable but a cost-reinibursement contract on a
              non-profit basis would be acceptable.
              Facilities
              Amona- equipment on hand is a complete microelectiode set-uT), a bigh-o-ain 6 chan7nel,
              D. C. polygraph, free, however, only part-time, a neurophys-olo-ical set-up for
              nerve stimulation and recording, animal surgical equipment ar-d diverse pieces of
              accessory and test equipment such as oscilloscopes, oscillators, etc. Animal
              sources are availaole

                        qp
             Costs
                     I)rincipal ltivcstigator (part-tin-ic)
                                                             including FICA
                     Research A,-4sistant (full-time)
                     Subjects
                     Animals
                     Scenographic Services
                     Reproduction
                     Expendables (Paper, Chemicals, E1lectronic Supplies)
                                      Sub-total
                                      Overhead at 20110
                                                         Tota I

