                         ELR-CTRCCHE.IICAL OBSERVATIOLTS III @IICROBIOLX"TCAL PROCESSES.  1.
                                       GR(XJTH OF THIOBACILLUS THIOOXIDATIS
                                                                                 7777777

                                                       SLT141,!ARY
                                   The growth of Thiobacillus thiooxidans  utilizing  sulfur  in
                         three media was studied by observing changes in  half-cell  emf,  bac-
                         terial cell count and production of acid as'a fundtiog of time.  A
                         comparison of the biological half-cell emf with comparable c2ontrol
                         half cells reveals that T. thiooxidans makes  an  electrochemical  con-
                         tribution to half-cell voltage.  A change from the more complex medium
                         of Skerman's mineral salts -to A.T.C.C. allowed  a  clearer  delineation
                         of T. thiooxidans' ability to make  an  electrochemical  contribation.
                                   Reproducible biological half-cell emfl2e  were  obtained  when
                         the ferrous sulfate was removed from the A.T.C.C.  medium.  One   half
                         cell comprising T. thiooxidans utilizing sulfur in  A.T.C.C.  was  ob-
                         served over a 111-day period.  During this time the initial half cell
                         voltage of -0.35 volts, decreased to a negative'value  of  -0.64  volts
                         (hydrogen emf series). T. thiooxidans  in  utilizing  sulfur  produces
                         only sulfate ion,, thereby simplifying the identification  of  an-elec-
                         trochemical contribution during growth.
                                                                777.

                                              J.  I,.=ODUCTION
                                The concept of converting chemical energy from natura
                        occurring fuels into electrical energy by biochemical reaction has in-
                        trigued man for many years.  Potter' in 1911-was the first to conduct
                                                                                     "the
                        experiments with biochem2ical galvanic cells.  He observed that
                        disintegration of organic compounds by microorganisms is acc=panied
                        by the libe                       gy
                                 ration of electrical ener      His experiments were conduc
                        primarily with the yeast-glucose system which gave open circuit voltages
                        between 0.3 and 0.5 V.  These exploratory experiments led to i=ves2ti-
                        gations in 1931 by Cohen,2who studied several bacterial cultures as
                        electrical half cells.  More recently, Beana Canfieldb  Bitterl
                        and their c6-workers have been working on various aspects of bioelec-.
                        tricity for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.  Empha-
                        sis in their investigations was placed on the utilization of organic
                     2   foodstuffs as an energy source,
                                 It order to gain a better understanding of voltages developed
                        in biological oxidations, a decision was made by the authors to investi-
                        gate some of the autotrophic bacteria.  Autotraphic bacteria because
                        of their ability to utilize inorganic substrates as an energy source
                        a Philco Corporation, Newport Beach, California.
              8          b Magna Corporation, Anaheim, California.
                        C The llarq@iardt Corporation, Van Nuys, California.
                                                        2

                        and carbon dioxide for their carbon requirements)  offered  a  different
                        and perhaps a simpler approach to associating  electrochemical  poten-
                        tials with metabolic activity of bacteria.  The sulfur oxidizing
        lot
                        bacteria., Thiobacillus, were chosen since they were among the most
                        metabolically active autotrophs. In these  studies,  primary  emphasis
       2                 was placed on T. thioo.%-idans.
                                  The electrochemical investigations reported in  this  paper
                        assume that sulfate ion is the only metabolic  product  associated  with
                        the oxidation of sulfur by Z. thiooxidans. This  assumption  has  the
                                                                    3 4
                        su2pport of earlier workers such as Starkey,     Starkey, Jones and
                                  5                    6                      7
                        Fredrick,  Vogler and Umbreit:  and Parker and Prisk.
                                        11.  ELECTROC=CAL ACCESSORIES
                                  Carbon (T)P-62-R) from the United Carbcn Company, Bay  City,
                        1-iichigan, was cut2 into electrodes.  The ends of the electrodes  were
                        plated @rith copper from a CuSO4 solution.  Copper leads were   soldered
                        to the plated surfaces. The leads and their contact  with  the  carbon
                        were treated with pataffin'to eliminate Wetting and direct contact
                        between the copper and nutrient*
                                  Platinum electrodes were prepared from platinum  ga0uze  (45
                        mesh, 0.0078 in diameter) obtained from  J.  Bishop  and  Company.  This
                                            -in
                        gauze was cut into 2     lengths, approximately 5/16  in  wide.,  Copper
                        leads  were soldered to one end of the gauze.  To prevent:possible
                                                        3

                        oxidation of the copper, the lead wires were covered with plastic
                        tubing.  This tubing was then anchored to the copper-platinum solder
                        joint by coating the end of the tubing and the junction with an
                                      To further prevent any possible diffusion of water to
                        epoxy resin.
                                                                      -2covered  junction,  the
                        and through the plastic tubing and the epoxy
                        lead wires were kept above the-.biological half-cell liq@iid,level.,-,  The
                        thermocouple effect for these  dopper-platinun  electrodes  was  found  to.
                        be negligible (5 pv/"c).
                                  These  biological  half-cell  investigations  involved  maintain-
2
                        ing an air atmosphere above the  media  in  the  cells.  The  electrochemi-
                        cal effect of supplying  fresh air above versus bubbling it directly
                        into the stirred media vas-negligible as  long  as  gaseous  concentra  on
                        gradients did  not  -exist.within.th  me    Table-l)-..--.--,-
                                                         2 e-  dia-@
                                                      TABLE I
                               DYIIA14IC AND STATIC AEROBIC COITDITIONS FOR STIF@RED
                                            E=-@CTRO -M@IICAL HALF CELTS
                                                   Aerobic               Potential, V
                                 Medium           Atmosphere   Static  Dymmic (Bubbling)      8
    2                    Sterile  distilled water     Air       -0.323        -0.329         0.006
                        Sl,,erman's                  Air       -0.365        -0.365         0.000
                        A.T.C.C.                     Air       -0.390        -0.390         0.000
                        A.T.C.C.  (minus FESO        Air       -0.420        -0.420         0.000
                                             4)
                                                          4

                                  Since composition gradients were known to be generated thr
                                                                                              ough
                        utilization of substrate by the uneven suspensions of  bacteria,  it  was
                        considered necessary to uniformly stir the  half cells.  The electro-
                        chemical effect of turning off the stirrer  was checked for the unin
        2                oculated media in which such composition gradients were abse
                                                                                      nt.  Table II
                        reveals that the effect of not stirring was appreciable  in  the  sterile
                        distilled water.  It became negligible when conducting nutrients were
                        added to the water.  In all large control and biological half cell
                        e2xper
                             iments reported in this paper, the cell constituents were stirred and
                        atmospheric air with its carbon dioxide was available to the media
                        through sterile cotton plugs.
                                                    TABLE II
                             EFFECT OF NOT STIR'.RIITG 'LARGE ELE-CTROCHF14ICAL HATY CELLS
                                             (AIR BTJBBTING llITO CELL)
                                                                       Potential, V
                                Medium                      On              Off              6
                        Sterile distilled water           -0.329          -0.240           0.089
                        Skerman's                         -0.365          -0.363           0.002
                        A.T.C.C.                   9       -0.390          -0.388           0.002
                        A.T.C.C. (minus FeSO4)            -0.420          -0.418           0.002
                                                          5

                                                                tion three basic biocell de-
                                During the course of experimenta
                                                                  -volved combining a biolo
                                               The first design in
                        signs were implemented.
                                                                        e half cell in a U-tube.
            2            eal half cell with either a control or a referenc
                                                     e tube separated the two half cells.
                        An agar plug in the bend of th
                        Although positive results for associating emfls with gro,,rth of T. thio-
                        oxidans were obtained with this initial design, @L modification (Fig'. 1),
                        which made aseparate opening to the2 agar bridge for connecting a ref-
                     .erence calomel cell, was desired.  Each of the original half cel3.s,
                        the biological and control, could now be monitored individually with
                        the calomel half cell.  Experiments with this modified U-tube were sat-
                        isfactory, however it was deficient in size and allowed concentration
                        gradients to form so a new large biolo ical half cell w2as designed.
                                                             9
                                           c -31--
                                 The abo-Ve@-. e -@designs--l-@'Lmi-tt-d -th-z amount@--of--@.Uquid to-
                        used to about 20 ml  of nutrient.  Furthermore, the long narrcnr tubes
                        presented little oppor2tunity for changes in electrode design, stirr ngj,
                        and continuous measurement of pH.  Therefore, the new design used a
                        large three- and, later, a five-necked 1 000 ml round-bottom flask
                        (Fig. 2).  A Teflon stirrer was suspended through the center neck sur-
                        rounded with a glass bearing.  Its action  diminished adid and mineral
                        concentration gradients and insure8d uniform suspension of bacteria for
                        population density determinations.  An agar salt bridge and calomel
                        cell were mounted in one opening and a glass and a platinum electrode-,
                        were placed in the third neck.  The calomel and glass electrodes were
                                                         6
                                                                                      .777-@

                        us          ording the pH values. This  entire  biological  half  cell
                         ed for rec
                        was mounted in a constant temperature bath (29*).    Prior to use  of.
                        this bath the electrochemical voltages were observed to fluctuate in
                        a cyclic manner with the room temperature whenever  T.  thiooxidans  was
                        present.  This behavior was especially2 evident when platinum elec
                        trodes were used.
                                  The agar salt-bridge,, mounted in one opening of the round-
                        bottcm flask, was led to a test tube containing  saturated  KCI  main-
                        tained at the same temperature as the biological half cell.  A standard
                        calomel electrode was mounted in the test tube  as  a  reference  half
                                    2                                               -3 potentiom-
                        cell.  Leads from the complete cell were connected to a K
                        eter and a pH meter.
                                  All parts -of th.e -.abDve- -cells whi-ch-.could- withstand -high-
                        temperatures were sterilized by  autoclaving.  The  other  parts  were
                        sterilized by rinsing in 2ethanol followed by three rinses with sterile
                        distilled water. Before sterilizat4-on  the  electrodes  were  cleaned
                        with concentrated sulfuric acid and then washed  with  distilled  water.
                                  All experimentation was  oriented  towards  obtaining  zero-
                                                                       -cell  reactions.   The
                        current potentials of complete as wel2l  as  half
                                                                                           T@-
                        initial electrochemical measurements  were  made with a Iliodel X-3  eds
                        Northrup potentiometer.  This instrument gave  accurate  voltage  deter-
                        minations when zero current  conditions  were  established.  However.%
                        while balancing the galvanometer to  obtain  zero  cu4rrent  coaditions
                                                         7
                                               77-,-

                        power was drawn initially from the cell causing, in  some  cases,  a  loss
                        Of voltage.   Since it was desirable to eliminate  this  probable  contri-
                        bution to variable results, a specially designed vacuum tube voltmeter'
                        was obtained for use with a recorder.  Open circuit conditions were
                        maintained by use of this vacuum tube voltme2ter and continuous emf
                        measurements could be taken with the recorder.
                                III.  l@aCROBIOU)GICAL TECMTIQUES AND OBSERVATIONS
                                  The application of microbiological  techniques  to  support  the
                        electrochemical investigations was focused on  two  areas  of  study.  The
                        first involved obtaining reproducible bacterial growth.  After such
         2               growth ,ras established, less complex media were sought by removing
                        i ndividual-- cons=uent-&-&x-cm-th4-,--@@more                   L!L'LvfJfit@r
                        area of study involved  developing techniques for determining
                        bacterial counts in the  uniform biological half cell suspensions.
                 2              -.,th of I-rhiobacillus thiooxidans
                        A.  Gro
                                  Successful growth of T. thiooxidans  was  studied  primarily  in
                        three media.  At first, reproducible growth of T. thiooxidans was ob-
                        tained with shaker cultures using Skerman'se basic mineral salts (17
                        salts). One per cent of sterile powdered  sulfur  was  suspended  in  th8is
                        medium.  High yields of 109  organisms/ml were obtained with mature
                        cultuz-es (maximum population density) after five days incubation.
                                                         8

                                  Since the interpretation of the emf measurements in the
                        Skerman's medium was exceedingly difficult., a simpler medium  was  sought.
                                        d
                        A.T.C.C. medium,  containing five salts plus 1 per cent sulfur, was
                        studied as a growth nutrient.  This medium gave mature cultures with
                                         8
  2                      populations of 10 bacteria/ml.  A further consideration of reducing
                        the salts, comprising A.T.C.C., bmughtabout the removal of ferrous
                        sulfite.  The concentration of T. thiooxidans in mature cultures in
                                                                           7
                        this medium, A.T6C.C.(-), was approximately 1 x 10  organism2s/ml.
                                  The bacteria to be used with the biocells usually were taken
                        from five-day-old mature shaker cultures. These  cultures  were  grown  in
                        250 ml Erlemeyer f2.asks with 30 ml  of  medium  in  each  flask.  Incuba-
                        tion was either at 29*  or at room temperature.
                                  The mature cultures were harvested from the shaker flasks by
    2                    centrifuging the organisms at 9,000 rpm for 5 min  in  a  Lourdes  centri-
                        fuge.  After decanting the supernatant, the cells were then washed twice
                        with sterile medium and were suspended  in the various volumes of the
                        sterile medium for the particular bacterial concentration to be used
                        for biological half-cell studies.
                        d                          7                   -7 H20: 50.0; CaCl2, 25.0;
                          Idilligrams/100 cc:.  (ITH4)2SO4. 20.0; MgSO4
                            FeSO4, 5-0; ICi2PO4, 300.0.
                                                          9

                       B.  Bacterial Counts
                                                                                          la
                                Two methods were applied for obtaining the  bacterial  popu
                       tions of the cultures in the preparation and operation of the biocells.
                       These methods were the Petroff-Hausser chamber count and the micro-
                       Kjeldahl analysis  for total nitrogen conten2t of the bacteria.
                       T. Thiooxidans was removed from the medium by filtration before a
                       modified micro-Kjeldahl analysis was  applied.  Turbidity  dete=ina-
                       tions for bacterial counts were not practical because of the presence
                       of powdered sulfur.  Pour and spread plate counts were discarded after
                       obtaining irregular and time consuming results.  The Petroff-Hausser
                  2     chamber counts were used to calibrate the nitrogen content from  the
                       bacterial with their concentration in the medium.
                                The micro-Kjeldahl technique was only used when appreciable
                       volumes of samples were available and concentrations of bacteria were
                       approximately 1 x 107/m, or greater.  Use of the Petroff-Hausser count-
                       ing chamber techniqu2e was preferred for lower concentrations of bacteria
                       and experiments where less than 1 ml of sample  was  available.  The
                       latter technique was adopted completely after the earlier phases  of
                       investi gation in order to minimize disturbing the biological half-cell
                       ecology.  The total amount of liq7aid required for the samples by this
                       t9echnique ,7as negligible compared to the large biocell volume.
        -f,                                           10

                         C.  General Microbiological Observations
                                  @lature populations obtained in the  large  biological  half  cell
                         (Table III) with Skerman's medium were  consistently less than observed
                         in the shaker cultures.  Subsequent experimentation with growth of
                                                                                 difference in
                         T2. thiooxidans in less complex media showed   that this
                         population density decreased with A.T.C.C.  and disappeared when
                         A.T.C.C.(-) was used.
                                                     TABLE III
                                        TYPICAL  MATURE  POPUTATION  DENSITIES
                                                               Large Biological
                                         Shaker Culture 2          Half Cell            Number of
                         MediL=          (organisms /ml)
                                                                (organisms/ml)           Salts
                                                                             8
                         Skerman's              I x 10                 1 x  10             17
                                                     08                      7
                         A.2T.C.C.               1 x I             1 to 5 x  10              5
                         A.T.C.C.(-)      1 to  5 x 107           1 to 5 x 107              4
                                   Experiments with growth of T.  thiooxidans  in  both  shaker  and
                         biocell cultures using Skerman's and A.T.C.C. as growth media showed
                         that the reduction in the  number of 2mineral salts  caused  a  decrease  in
                         the mature population density.  Two typical biocells (Fig. 3) were
                                                                                         The tem-
                         started with similar inoculi and similar volumes of medium.
                         perature for both biocells was held at 290.     Similar  lag  periods  were
                         observed during the first day, followed by  a  rise  in 1 bacterial  cqncen-
                         trations during the second day.  During the third day of incubation,

                                         entrations were observed to rise more rapidly in
                         the bacteria conc
                         Skerman's than in A.T.C.C.  After this period the population density
                                                        8                          7
                         appeared.to stabilize at 1 x 10 for Skerman't  and  4  x  10  bacteria/ml
                         for the A.T.C.2C. media.
                              :[V.  EIECT.ROCHMIICAL OBSERVATIOI-TS I-RITH T. THIOOXIDALIS
                                  The initial investigations were concerned with establishing
                         that an electrochemical potential, different from that of a control
                         cell, exists when T. thiooxidans utilizes sulfur.  The U-tube was chosen
                         for these s2tudies.  Each side of the U-tube comprised a half ce       one
                                                        gen-carban  reference  electrode.   Dupli-
                         biological and the other an oxy
                         cate U-tubes were prepared with only one difference.  T. thiooxidans
                         was present i a-the.- qrm-of-.-O-ne..-Of-. them.. -,-The other half cell had only2
                         sulfur suspended in Skerman's medium.  Figure 4 shows that a significant
                         difference exists between the complete cell emfls of the inoculated and
                               I cell.  Such results were typical both wh
                         contro                                            en carbon and when
                         platinum electrodes were used in the cells.  The  increase  in  the  dif-
                         ference wit2h time suggests that after acclimation to the cell, T. thio-
                         oxidans became active and started to utilize the  sulfur  which  in  turn
                         changed the electrochemical nature of the half cell.
                                   Biological and  control half cell emflr-j using platinum  elec-
                         trodes             ed as a function of time in the modified U-tube
                               ,were measur
            5             design (Fig. 1).  The biological ha3.f.cells consistently gave voltages
                                                          12

                     which were lower than their controls, however, leaks  through  the  agar
                     plug at various times after cell preparation encourayed pursuing experi-
                     mentation with a better cell desi-n.
                               The remaining experiments were conducted with large biological
                     half cells using platinum in preference to the slower  responding carbon
                     elec2trodes.  Since quantitative data were expected from the use of this
                     new cell design, a check was made on how increases in hydrogen and sulfate
                     ion would affect the half cell electrochemical emf as measured by this
                     electrode.  Sulfuric acid was added separately in approximately 20 incre-
                     ments to  1 per cent suspensions of powdered sulfur in each of the three
                     media under con2sideration for studying growth  of  T.  thiooxidans.  The
                     initial pH values of approximately 5.0 gave way upon  additions  of  the
                     acid to values of -1-.0. --Each-add;Lttoa,-qf--Itc--kd -ted p3@ i
                                                                    Aimula      -941@ct on of
                     Sulfuric acid by T. thioo2xiclans.  The maximum variation in half  cell emf's
                     with Skerman's medium experiencing these changes in pH was O.OIP V.
                     Subsequent exoerimentation with A.T.C.C. and A.T.C.C.(-)  media  gave  a
                     smaller maximum variation for the same total change  in  pH.  Thus,  the
                     electrochemical background fluctuations to be e.-cpected wh7en sulfate ion
                     is produced by T. thiooxidans were identified.
                     A.  Medium Effect on Biocell Activity
                               Shaker cultures of T. thiooxidans were grown in Skerman's,
                     A.T.C.C., arA A.T.C.C.(-) media under similar conditions.  The prep-
                     arations for centrifuging, washing, and resuspension  in  fresh  sterile

                       media, were planned to give populations having a concentration of
                            7
                              bacteria/ml.  Howeverj the indeterminate losses in the trans-
                       I x 10
                       fers gave rise  to a slight variance in initial bacterial suspensions
                       in the large biological half cells.  The suspension in A.T.C.C.(-) was
2
                                                                    7
                       1.2 x 107.  The value for Skerman's was I x 10  and for A.T.C.C., 2 x
                        6
                       10 bacteria/ml.
                                After i                           s observed to take  place
                                       noculation, a lag phase wa
                       during growth in each medium (Fig. 5).  The v2alues for bacterial popu-
                       lation counts under the dotted line in Fig. 5 were below the  micro-
                       Kjeldahl analysis so they were estimated (Petroff-Hausser Count).
                       After 70 hr, the population in the Skerman's salts,  which  was  ini-
                       tially similar to the other two media, was noii greater.  Subsequent
       2i
                       bacterial counts showed that the populations2 stabilized and after eight
                       days the Skerman's-medi= had a population of 1 x 108  while both A.T.C.C.
                                                 x 1 7           1.  These saturation popula-
                       media had approximately 5    0 bacteria/M
                       tions were typical of large biocell experiments with these three media
                       (Table III).
                                 If2 the variation in the initial concentration in bacteria can
                       be ignored the amount of total acid produced by T. t'.Iiiooxidans seemed
                       to depend upon the medium in which it grew.  Since it was not possible
                       to wash residual amounts of acid from the centrifuged cellsj, the initial
                       pH values differed.  Subsequent accumulation of acid is shown in Fig, 6.
                       Of parti5cular interest was the fact that T. thiooxidans produced less

                      cid (0.73 =ole) in the Skerman's medium in attaining a greater cell
                      a
                                        7
                                 7 x 10 bacteria/ml than in the other two media (3.66 mmole
                      population:
                      for A.T.C.C.(-) and 1.89 mmole for A.T.C.C.) for the initial 70-hr
                      rotrth interval2.
                      9
                               The growth of T. thiooxidans was followed by     electrochemical
                      measurements.  The fact that-the control half cells (Fig. 7) started at
                      exactly the same emf was coincidental. They  usually  differed  by  small
                      amounts. T. thiooxidans was observed as a contaminant  (Fig.  7)  in  the
                      control half cell for the Skerman's medium after the 502-hr  measure-
                      ments.  The visual presence of this microorganism was supported by a
                      corresponding change in pH due to  acid  production.  This  microbiologi-
                      cal activity caused a decrease in half-cell voltage as indicated by the
                      values at the 70-hr  interval.
                                The change from the initial emfls for the Ske=an's and
                      A.T.C.C2. half cell controls were typical for  these  media.  Since  their
                      half-cell voltages usually stabilized after  20  hr,  subsequent  experi-
                      mentation involved preparation and operation of two  control  half  cells
                      u=tilvoltage stability was observed.  Then., one of the half cells  was
                      inoculated for comparison of their behavior as a function of time.  These
                      complications were5 minimzed when working with the A.T.C.C.(-) medium.
                      Its half-cell emf was less erratic and stabilized quite readily.
                                                      15
                                                                                                7.
                                                                  ;,@ 77,

                            The inoculated A.T.C.C.(-) (FiG. 8) half  cell  had  the  same
                   initial voltage as its control half cello whereas the other inoculated
                   half cells were higher than their controls.  After 33 hr  each of the
                   inoculated half cells had voltages more negative  than  their  control
                   cells. The behavior of the inoculated  A.T.C.C.  and  2A.T.C.C.(-)  half
                   cells was comparable after 29 hr  of operation.  These cells gave lower
                   voltages than the inoculated Skerman's half cell.  The relatively small
                   difference between the inoculated and control  half  cells  comprising
                   Skerman's medium pointed out the need to have a  less  complex  medium
                   intimately following growth of T.,thiooxidans electrochemica2lly.  Thus:
                   subsequent studies were conducted with A.T.C.C. and A.T.C.C.(-) media.
                   The biological half cell emfls with these media were found to be more
                   stable and further-remov,@d,@r;@@Aheir  control  half-ceu  values.  The
                   removal of the ferrous sulfate from the A.T.C.C. medium offered addi--
                   tional improv2ement in control and biological  half-cell  stability  And
                   reproducibility.
                   B.  Long Term Biological Half-Cell Activ it
                             Spedial precautions were taken with the  preparation  of  one
                   experiment which was allowed to run for an extended  period  of  time.
                   Emphasis was placed on minimizing external contact with the medium to
                   eliminate the possibility of contamination and3 to increase the probabil-
                   ity of long life. The supply of oxygen and car'@.-on dioxide for  this
                                                   16
                      77@@-
                                      777777@-

                                                                                      ton
                                  If cell came from the atmosphere through sterile cot
                    biological ha
                                                                 e wires leading into the
                    p lu,,-   c
                        ,s pla ed in the small air gaps around th
                                                                      ogical half cel2l was
                     cell through the rubber stoppers*  The large biol
                                                                                 ectrode  at-
                       ed with its Teflon stirrers pH meter, and the platinum el
                     us
                                 It was filled with sterile A.T.C.C. medium'         erized
                     tachments.                                               charadt
                   2                                                        oxidand to give an
                     (-pH, emf, sterility) and then inoculated with T. thio
                     initial concentration of approximately 7 x 107 bacteria/ml.  Sterile
                     sulfur was used as the energy source in this  medium.  The  cell  counts
                     pH and biological half-cell behavior for a 16-day period  are  shown  in
                     Fig. 9.  Table IV describe2s the behavior of this  cell  approaching  the
                      lllth day.  Between these times the emf and the bacterial counts fluc-
                      tuated slightly with a fairly uniform accumulation of acid.- The general
                      trend of the half cell potential was to become more negative.  After  the
                      111 days, the biological half cell was observed to be  contaminated  wi
                      bacteria other2 than T. thiooxidans.  The half-cell emf was observed to
                      become more positive after b                        This observation was
                                                   ec=ing contaminated.
                      consistent with that obtained from other inoculated biological half
                       cells which became contaminated with foreign bacteria.
                                                       17

                                                     TABLF, IV
                             SUPPUVC,L'TARY DATA FO',R LOrk@j TERII BIOLCGICAL HALF  CELL
                                             thiooxidans Utilizing Sulfur)
                       Time Period      Half-Cell emf
                           (clays)            (v)               pH            BacteriaLml
                        2                                                           x  107
                             72              -0.61              1.18            5
                                                                                   x  107
                             76              -0.62              1.09            5
                                                                                       7
                             79              -0.61           2   1.05            3  x 10
                                                                                       7
                             83              -0.62              0.97            4  x 10
                             90              -0.63              0.92            4  x 107
                                                                                       7
                             99              -0.63              0.921            6  x 10
                                                                                       7
                             106             -0.64              0.95            4  x 10
                             ill             -0.64              0.92            3  x 107
                                  Several  interesting  features  were  worth   noting in this long
                       term experiment.  lihe initial inocul2ation gave a population of 7 x 10      7
                       T. thiooxidans/ml.  Death occurred lowering the population beloer the -
                       level of  detection  by  the                                     end of thg-
                       initial day of operation, the population was observed to increase to
                       1.5 x 107.  Fluctuations  between  this  value  and  3  k  10 7 were observed
            2           throughout the 17-day interval shown in Fig. 9.  Between the end of this
                                                                                7
                       period and the lllth day, a maximum count of 5 x 10  was obtained.  The
                                                      7
                       Population dropped to 3 x 10     bacteria/ml towards the end of the experi-
                       ment.  The ecological factors  6  effecting bacterial growth kept the cell
                       population in this range.  The    pH of the medium   changed from an initial
                       value of 4.85 to about 1..7 units after 15 days.  Changes in its value
                       after this time were small since appreciable amounts of acids had to be

                    produced relative to the total amount present in order to bring about  a
                    change in pH.  The fact that T. -thiooxidans was not increasing its popu-
                    lation suggests inactivity but the increase in sulfuric acid  concentra-
                    tion indicates that a constant cell division and death rate  existed.
                    The general trend in the half-cell emf throughout this time period  was
                    t2o become more negative.
                              The consistent trend in the curves obtained in this experi-
                    ment indicated that many of the past variations in hilf cell  potentials
                    were no longer present and that reproducibility of subsequent  biologi-
                    cal half cells should be expected. One exception to  this  consistent
                    trend toward a lower half cell potential may be significant.  A  notice-
   2                 able decrease in cell population appeared to take place after the eighth
                    day.  Thj,,s d4p,.        recovery seemed to cause a simultaneous change
                    in the electrochemical potential.
                    C.  ReDroducibi2.ity of Biological Half Cell
                              Several biological half cells were prepared with T. thio-
                    oxidans utilizing sulfur in the A.T.C;C.(-) medium to determine  repro-
                    ducibi2.ity of results. Figure 10 records their biological  half-cell
                    emf for a five-day period. Initially, the cells started  at  approxi-
                    mately the same voltage followed by a slight rise and then a  decrease.
                    A slight divergence in values then takes place for one and one-half
                    days. After this interv5al they gave equivalent  results.  The  effect
                                                   19

                                                                             er three  days
                                              shown in Series XLVI when aft
                    of hie.,er teuperature
                                                                                        bath
                                                      his time the thermostat for its
                    the emf decreases markedly.  At  t
                               2                                                         enced
                    malfunctioned and temperatures   exceeding 60* were probably experi
                    during the evening period.  This irreparable damage caused formation o
                    a lower ha3-f-cell emf, measured upon return and subsequent control at
                     290.
                               Figure 11 records the change in pH of  each  of  these  half
                     cells.2  One can readiiy see that after the initial inoculation, a slight
                     divergence takes place.  This divergence disappears after about one day,
                     giving rise to similar amounts of acid formed in each of the cells.
                                The divergence in the microorganisms' contribution to emf and
      lp
                      acid formation between the one-fourth and one and one-half day period
                              2                                          p                 g phase
                                                                   pi-sm- x eriencing a  la
                      appears to@-be,. c=3@,st--
                      in each of the biological half cells throughout this time    interval.
                      Figure 1P  shows the bacterial cell count per milliliter as a function
                      of time.   A lag phase existed in each ce5U with a slight inconsistency
                      in the  recovery time.  In general, the cell populations duplicated
                      themselves in each of the cells.  The last two values for the cell
                       count in Series XLVI reflect the damage caused by the temperature of
     7@
                       the bath exceeding the control value.
                                                        20

                                            V.  DISCUSSION
                             The existence of an electrochemical contribution from T. thio-
                   oxidans was established during the initial investigations with combined
                   half cells comprising biological and contrar half cells with  either  a
                   calomel or oxygen-carbon electrode.  The cell comprising T. thiooxidane
                   utilizing sulfur made contributio2ns to an  electrochemical  potential
                   which reflected microbiological activity.  Subsequent  experiments  with
                   well defined biological half cells, comprising emf, pH,  and  bacterial
                   count determinations, supported the initial  observations.  The  inter-
                   action of T. thiooxidans with the various nutrients as well  as  sulfur
                   gave half cell emfls which were distinctly different t2han  control  half
                   cells operated for comparable periods of time under identical  experi-.
                   mental conditions*  The reduction in -the-n=berof.nutrient ions for
                   growth of T. thiooxidans improved one's ability to measure  its  more
                   intimate contributions to an electrochemical emf.  However,  since  the
                   measured half cell emf is an algebraic resultant of  each  ele2ctrochemi-
                   cal contribution in the half cell
                                                      it is not possible at.this  time  to
                   say how T. thiooxidans is imp3-icatede If sufficient  activity  coeffi-
                   -cients at these ionic concentrations would be available,  the  theoreti-
                   cal contributions of the constituents of the media could  be  calculated
3
                   so the remaining biological contribution could  be  identified.  This
                   calculation is much too complicated at present.  However,, as further
                                                   21
                                                                                       77

                       experimentation progresses towards finding the minim= n=ber of miner-
                       als necessary for growth of T. thiooxidans utilizing sulfur the Dossi-
                       bility of calculating the actual contribution of each constituent and
                       thereby the specific contribution of T. thiooxidans becomes much greater.
                       The premise that the study of electrochemical behavior!of autotrophs.,,
                       especially Thiobacillus Sp., may be simpler than heterotrophs has not
                       been resolved in thete-investigations.  Additional study with both-types
                       of species will be needed before a conclusion can be made that one or
                       the other will offer the simpler approach to gaining a better under-
                       standing of electrochemical processes that take place during micro-
    2                   biological growth.
                                                Ackno,@iled_7me,.it
                                -The authors
                                                           -t@who acted as consultants for
                       obtaining optimum conditions for electrochemical measurements and
                       microbiological growth.
                                                       22
3
                            7
                                                                        7@

                                                 REFERRICES
                     i.  M. C. Potter. Proc. ROY. SOc. (T-ondon), 84B, 260 (1911).
                                   J. Bact.., 21, 18 (1931).
                     2.  B. Cohn)
                     3.  E. L. Starkey, J. Bact..* ioy 135-163 (1925).
                     4.  R. L. Starkeyy J. 2Bact.-t 28jp 387-399 (1934).
                                                                                   n. MicrobiOl.
                                                  nes
                     5.  E. L. Starkey, G. E. Jo        and L. E. Fredrick, J. Ge
                            15., 329-334  (1956).
                                                        it. Soil Sciencej,  51,  331-339 (1941).
 2                    6.  K.  G. Vogler and W.   W.  Umbre
                                                          Gen.  Microbio]L.,  8  344-346 (@1953).
                      7.  C. D. Parker and J.   PriSk,  J
                      S.  V. B. D. Skerman., A  Guide t  Identification  of  the  Genera of
                            Bacteria, Williams and Wilkins    Company,  143-144  (1959).
                      9.  E  Kabat and M. Mayer, 5Experimental Imm'UnOcllemistry, Second Edition,
                                   s C-.  Themas-
                             Cnarle
       71
                                                          23

                                 Ili tLi ti  O' bd>
                                                                                                                                      P.
                                 td             )-d
                                                     Ld
                                 H. ct
                                 la, @ii 0
                                         0      ci-
                                 aq
                                 (D ra En            (D
                                   ct 0)
                                      ci-
                                         (D    (D
                                         PV    (D
                                   fA OZI (D   :i
                                   0  M  4     0
          2                                     (D0
                    (D           Cf-           FAm
                                 (D0
                                               0(D
                    ci                         C+ r)
                                                (+
                                 r)            0II
                                 (D            CL0
                                     5          mP.
                   ct
                   (D
                   ct
                   $.It
                                                                                                                   ci

                                          bJ    @l- 1-4                                                                                        
bJ
                                                                                                                                               
2    tzi
                                CY'    ct-      0
                                                      H
                      ro
                                                      ID
                                      FJ
                                                4D
                                                      Fl
                                                                                                   2                                           
t-i
                                             t-i
                       Fi
                                       o(D
                                             0    cn
                                       ct0
                       Fl              ct En
                                       ci-
                                 3      c+    F-
                                             C+   P,
                                       C+
                                                   C+
                                       ct

                                                                                                                                               
Bacteria/ml
                                                                                td
                                                                        I       0
                                                                        0                                                                      
2                                                                                                                                              
ell.
                                                                                                                                               
C>                                                                                                                                     0
 6                                                                                                                9--= C=
                          I:d
                           0
       >      0
               >
        cn
                             CD         cn
                                          CD

                        0.12
                      0
                         0.08
                      0
                      0
                      0  0.04
                         0.00                                                                                      28
                                                                                         20           24
                                         24
                             O'                       8          12           16
                                                                   Time (days)
                                                                                                   -Tubes
                                                 Voltage Difference Between Control. and Biocell, U
                                        Fig. 4

                                                  (D 0
                                                  I  0  ct- :k:
                        ot4     0
                        cn
                        bJ
                        ct
                        CD
                     c-t
                        FJ
                     C-L0
                        ct
            4                  En
             1>o                0
                     ct @:i
             H  @-3
                     (n Fi
          (n            ci-
                        CD

                                     0-0
                                     V-17
                         VTPD;I ;UaaDjlTc UT poznzcza PTOV 9 gTa
               09        Os         ot         or,                   OT        0
                                                                                 100-0
                         2                                                        1010
                                                                       eo
                                                                                 I-o                               ti

                                                                     . . .    ..............
                                            0.3
                                                                        A-A                                                          0-0
                                      rA ft                             0                    0-
                                                       ap"2,
                                                    0                                                                                          
oi@-C
                                            0.4
                                                                                        0 0.---'.
                                          0
                                            0.5
                     2                             0                 10                20                 30                 4 0               
5 0                6 0                7 0
                                                                                                            Time (hours)
                                                                              Fig. 7         Control flalf Cells with Different                
Media
                                            2                                                         (sulfur suspensions)
                                                                                                                      C) A.T.C.C.(-)
                                                                                                                           A.T.C.C.
                                                                                                                           Skerma4n's

                                -0.3
                                   )t O.O.-O
                                              O         O.... 0
                                                 -O
                                                                                        0-0. o@O                     0
                               0  4
                                       0.
                        2                  0-0
                          r4
                           Ca
                             bo
                             0 - 0.!5
                                                                                                     0
                               0.61
                                  0           1.0         20           30          4 0         50          60          7 0
                   2                                                    Tizae   (hours)
                                                     -Lv>- 8 Inoculated Ifalf Cel.l.s wi.tli Different Media
                                                                (T4 thiooxidans utilizing sulfur)
                                                                                    A.T.C.C.(-)
                                                             8                       A.T.C.C.
                                                                        O@@ 0       Skcritian's

                                             k
                                                                     lift
                -0.40
                -0.45
              to
              0
              Id
                                   o 0
                                                                                      0 0
                                    A A
                                                           2                                                            0
                                                                                                                      AC==.3 A
                                                                  A,'-c=:30A           A                        A
                     0            2            4                         8            10           12           14          16
                      6                                                   Time (days)
                                                     Fig. 9    Long T'erm Biological lialf Cell Behavior
                                                                 (T. thi.ooxi.dins, Siilfxir, A.T.C.C.)
                                                                                   0

         .4
                        00
                      Cb
                                               C@
                                                    0
                                                                         0
                          1          2           3           4          5
                                                  Time (days)
                             Fig. 10  Rep9roducibility of Biologic,-.1 Half Cel-1, e,-,,f
                                        (T. thiooxidans, A.T.C.'C.(-), sulfur)
                                                     0-0 Series XLVI
                                                               Series XLVII
                                                      0-0 Series IZT

          o
                                                                                    10
                        I           2           3                      5            6
                                                Ti!rie (days)
                           Fig. 11   Reproducibility of Biological Half Cell, pH
                                       (T. thiooxidans, A.T.C.C.(-)5, sulfur)
                                                0-0 Ser-ies XLVI
                                                          Series XLVII
                                                0      0 Series LII

                                                                                            0           0
                                                   _.Z 0
                                           0
                                                      0
                               7
                             10
                                                       2                       4           5           6
           2                                                         Time (days)
                                       Fig. 12   Reproducibility of Bacterial Growth in Biological Ifalf Cell
                                                      (T. thiooxidans, A.T.C.C.(-), sulfur)
                                                                       C)@@o Series XLVI
                                                                                 Series XLVII3
                                                                                 Series LII

                                                                     July 1, 1965
                        Dea--
                                                                 e
                        Encrosed are two copies of our paper  '?El ctrochemical Observations
                        in Microbiological Processes.  II. Gro,4th o-l' Th-iob@x@lu@-, Th ans.
                            2                                         'or release of this
                        I would appreciate your making arrangements
                        paper for publication.  Any co=ents thel, you or yocx --s.sociates
                                       -proving the paper
                        may have for im                  would be well received.
                        Thar-k you for your kind assistance in getting this paper released.
               9                                                   Very truly yours,

      low
                                               -RVATIONS IN ICCriOBIOLOGICAL PROCESSES.  II-
                           ELEC-LROCHM.EECAL OBSZ
                                       GRO14TH OF T.TIIOBACILLUS THICOXIDANS

                                                    SUI-24ARY
                                 The electrochemical activity of the individual chemicals
                       in the nutrient medium for growth of Thiobacillus thiooxidans was
                       studied along with the effect of the gases in7equilibri@= with   their
                       solutions. Several chemicals were  active  individually,  howe2ver  the
                       magnitudes, as measured by changes in half-cell potential,  were  less
                       than that observed when T. thicoxidans was present in their com-
                       posite mixture. Sterilized Skerman's mineral salts  and  the  American
                       Type Culture Collection (without ferrous sulfate) media were not
     @74               sensitive electrochemically to changes from pure oxygen to nitrogen
                     2  atmospheres.  When T. thiooxidans was present in these media,the
                       biological half-cell emf became sensitive to changes in the oxygen
                       content of the atmosphere in equilibri= with the organism and
                       nutrient.  The ability of T. thiooxidans to make an electrochemical
                       contribution, as registered by a platinum electrode, is substantiated
                       further by those investigations.1

                                               I.  Introduction
                                   The existence  of an electrochemical contribution by
                         Thiobacillus thiooxidans  utilizing sulfur during growth was previously
                         established.   The fact,  that this electro'chemical behavior existed,
                         raised several questions  about its origin.  A review of the possible
                                        2
    2                     half-ce
                                11 emfls  which may exist when sulfur is oxidized in this
                         system to sulfite thiosulfate, polythionate,  or  sulfate,  suggests
                         that the previously measured emf may be the resultant of several
                         potentials due to the steady state concentrations of such intermediates.
                         Even though Starkey  and subsequent workers fo=d 2that only sulfate
                         was formed by T. thiobxidans utilizing sulfur, the magnitude of the
                         observed biological half-cell emf was such that it could  rise  from
                         the presence of small amounts of intermediate products in steady
                         state ratios.  Therefore, microtechniques of analysis were employed to
                         check whether or not any heretofore undetected   oxidation-reductio2n
                         reactions contributed to the observed biological half-cell emfls.
                                   Since T. thiooxidans is an aerobe, its growth depends
                         upon the availability of o.-cygen. The effect of oxygen or the  lack
                         of it on the electrochemical character of control and inoculated
                         half cells, was investigated also to isolate T. thiooxidans'con-
        3                 tribution to a half cell potential.

                                      II.  Electrochemical Accessories
                                  The electrochemical apparatus used in these studies was
                         equivalent to that described in the previous paper except for  some
                         minor additions.  Of necessity, the vacuum @ube voltmpter and re-
                         corder combination were used to measure the immediate electrochemical
                         response to 2changes from aerobic to anaerob c atmospheres above the
                         half cells.  Figure 1 shows the essential elements of the circuitry
                         ccmprising the electrochemical measurements.  The voltage output
                         on the output resistor was fed as an input signal to a Daystrom-
                         Weston Model 6701, Type 1 continuous chart recorder.  This recorder---
                         (an automat2ic recording potentiometer) remained continually bal-
                         anced with the potential input from the voltmeter.  The voltmeter
                         output current was the direct result of the difference  between  the
                         biological half-cell and the calomel reference,half-cell potentials.
                         Open circuit conditions were maintained by use of this  vacuum  tube
                         voltmeter. Calibrations with a stand2ard cell  via  a  Leeds-Northrup
                         K-3 potentiometer before and after experimentation  insured  correct
                         recorder measurements of half-cell potentials.  All half-cell emfls
                         quoted in this paper are based on the standard  hydrogen  electrode.
                                   The large volume biological half cell, utilizing the
                         platinum, glass, and calomel electrodes,agar-KC1 salt bridg9e, and
                         Teflon stirrer, was used for these investigations.  The preparation,
                                                     2

                         inoculation, and oueratio,-l of this cell duplicated our earlier  in-
                         vestigations  except for one additioa to the cell design.  A gas
                         sparger was inserted into one of the five necks of the one liter
                         flask.  One of the rubber stoppers in an adjacent neck was perfo-
                         rated to p;ovide an exhaust vent for the gases bubbled into the half
          2               cell.  This vent insured that the total pressure of the gases above
                         the nutrient would not exceed that of the outside atmosphere.
                                   A Precision Scientific 'llet Test Meter" was used  to  measure
                         the amount and flow of various gases into the  half  cells.  This  meter
                         also saturated each gas with water vapor, thus reducing losses by
                         evaporatio2n from the biocell.
                                   The effects of stirring the biocell and bubbling  gases  into.
                         the media;-iveT@eL-d-L-teT-mnet@,,Pm-,,ftftl,,A'n-tt?-trgeir,'"-,=,d,,,o@c@.@   MV@-that,&s
                         in magnitude of the half-2cell voltage for pure  nitrogen  and  oxygen
                         for each of the media were equivalent to those  reported for  air  in
                         the earlier paper, i.e. static atmosphere  versus  sparger  bubbling,
                         less thaa one millivolt; cn-off stirring action, less than two
                         millivolts for each of the media considered in these studies.
                             III.  Microbiological Preparations and Observations5
                                   T. thiooxidans for these biocell investigations were taken
                         from five-day-old mature shaker cultures grown at room temperatures.
                                               77777777--,

                                                                              a
                         These cultures, comprising separately Skerrmn's' ATCC  and
                       ATCC (_)b mineral salts, were groiin in 250 ml Erldnmeyer flasks
                       with ldp sulfur for an energy source.  The mature cultures were har-
                         vested by centrifuging the organisms at 9 000 rpm for 5 min.  The2
                         supernatant was then decanted, the cells washed with fresh sterile
                         medium, resuspended and recentrifuged.  After another washing, they
                             resuspended in the chosen sterile medium controlled at 29"C
                         were
                         for the biological half-cell investigations@
                                 IV.  Analysis for Sulfur Intermediates
            2                      The desire to relate emf changes to specific oxidation-
                         reduction states within the sulfur system, made it mecessary to
                         investigate the--possible--exis-tence-.nL-Rnlfur-intex=edi-a-tes-and-thejx__
                         changes with time.  The approach to the analysis of the biocells
                         was initially divided into two2 phases.
                                  Phase one was concerned with the  gross description of thle
                         cell medium at increasing time intervals during the experiments.
                         Phase two concerned itself with the measurement of the amount of
                         intermediate products formed during biocell operation.
                         a.  American Type Culture 1-tedium, mg/100 cc:  (NH4)2SO4, 20.0;
       1                                    50.0; CaCI2, 25.0; FeSO4, 5.0; KH
                              14gSO 4 - 7 HL                                2@04, 300-0.
                         b.  Same as (a) without FeSO4.
                                                     4
                                :77

                                   During the invettigations, the                   biocell
                             wA@-- by titrating with standard bases and oxidizing agents.
                         was i
                         Sex:ples of the medium after different periods of growth showed that
                         the presence of strong acid (sulfurid) could be assayed by titration
                         with alkali to a pH o2f 5.0.  An extension of the titration to a
                         pH of 8.5 was employed to detect the presence of weak acids.  These
                         pH values were chosen frcm inflection points observed during ti-
                         trating samples from the bi6cell.  Since several of the possible
                         sulfur intermediates that could be formed react with iodine, in-
                         dependent and simul-taneous iodine tit.-ations were also conducted.
                                   Phase two concerned the development and application of
                         a collirm chromatographic separation for the potential metabolic
                         intermediates.  This method was derived from' an adaption of
                                    5
                                                                                        6
                         Trudinger's2  work on the medium of Thiobacillus X, and Iguchils
                         methods  of anion separation with anion-exchange resins.
                                   Approximately 10 =1 samples of cultures were removed from
                         the biological half cell at prescribed intervals, and after fil-
                         tration to remove all sulfur and bacteria, ala exact volume of 10 ml
                         was eluted through a c8olumn of 3 g washed Dowex 1 x 4 anion exchange
                         resin contained in an 8 = O.D. glass tube fitted with a glass stop-
                         cock for flow control.  The various fractions were eluted as follows:
                                                      5

                                     1. The sulfite  and  sulfide  fractions  were  eluted  with
                          20 ml of 0.5 M a=onium acetate, pH S.
                                     2. The thiosulfate was eluted  with  10  ml  of  2  M  a=onium
                          acetate, pH 5.
                                     3.  The polythionate fraction was removed in the following
                          manner. A mixture of. -2l.ml bf I per -cent--qodi=- cyanide and .2  -ml
                          of 1:10 annoni= hydroxide was added to the column and allowed to
                          react with the remaining constitutents for 5 min.  The solution
                          was eluted and the resin was  washed  thoroughly  with  20  ml  distilled
                          water. Two milliliters of 1:10  nitric  acid  was  added  to  t2he  column
                          and allowed to react for 5  min.  The  eluate  was  then  washed  through
                          with 1 ml of distilled water and collected in a graduated tube.  The
                          eluate, and-washings                             -to-tal--vol-ume-of S-m-2',
                          with distilled water.
                                     The amounts of sulfite and thiosul..'Late eluted  were  deter-
                          mined by  iodine  titration.  The  polythionates  were  assayed  after
                          the addition of two drops  of  10  per  cent  ferric  a=oni=  sulfate  to
                          the prepared nitric  acid  eluates.  The  amount  of  color  developed
                          was determined by absorbance measurements of 460 nip with a Beckman
                          LU spectrophotometer.  4These procedures were checked with known
                          mixtures of the sulfur intermediates  in  cell  media  with  and  without
                          T. thiooxidans before being applied to the analysis of biological
                          half  cells.
                                                         6
                                              7777

                                  The results from the analysis for the gross desdriptica
                        of the shaker and biocell cultures are stn-..p ized in Tables I and 11
                        for typical changes in compositions as a function of time.  Table  III
                        represents typical analyses for the specific sulfur intermediates.
                                                          earlier observations 2with more
                        These results are consistent with
                        rapid accumulatioa of acid in the shaker culture as compared to
                        the large biocells.  Specific observations gove rning the data in
                        these tables are as follows:
                                  1.  The accumulation of strong acid, indicated by alkaline
                        titraticn  to pH 5, was shown by subsequent precipitation with bar2i=
                        chloride to be a direct result of the formation of sulfate ions.  It
                        was not unusual to obtain a pH of 1.0 within several weeks of
                        operat                                     -d "giver a total of 60--iM
                             ion., - -For a,600 ml --bi@ocel-l-, th:ts-,woul
                        of hydrogen ion or 30 mli of sul2fate ion.
                                 2.  The concentration of the weak acids, indicated by
                        the second titration to pH 8.5, was very small, below 0.04 meq/ml.
                        A significant increase during growth of T. thiooxidans was not ob-
                        served.
                                 3.  The total oxidizable intermediates of the inoculated
                        cells (Tablesl and II) was in9itially very small, below O-OC02 meq/ml.
                        This concentration did not increase as a function of the time.  The
                        unimoculated controls showed essentially the same concentrations of
                        these products as did the biocells.
                                                   7

                                                       TABLE I
                             CROSS DESCRIPTION  OF ACIDS MID OXIDIZABI@L" IIM-V-RMEDI-017LIS
                                   FORI@IED DURING LARGE- SEA=,-R CULTURE C-ROI-ITH
                                                   (Medi=, ATCC)
                           Time                Titrati2ons  (millieguivalents)  For  10  ml  Sample
                          (days)     pH        NAOH to pH    5     NAOH to pH     8.5       Iodine
                            0       2.20             0.27                0.25              0.002
                            1       2.16             0.30                0.26              0.003
                            4       1.52             1.41                0.27        2      0.003
                            5       1.40             1.71                0.27              0.004
                            6       1.38             2.19                0.28              0.004
                            a       1.50             2.97                0.31              0.002
                            10      1.07             3.85                0.29              0.004
                     3       IP      1.04             4.40                0.25              0.003
                                                          8

                                                     TABLE II
                            GROSS rr-.ccRIPTION OF ACIDS AIID OXIDIZABLE Illrrr-I.RIIEDIATES
                                  FCRIE-D RURING BIOLOGICAL F-us-CELL 001-ITH
                                                  (Medi=, ATCC)
                                                  Titrati2olis ('Lliillieguivalents) For 10  ml  Samples
                            Time        pH        NAOH to pH    5      NAOH  to  pH  8.5       Ic,.I-ine
                           0           4.45             0.01                  0.24              0.002
                           4 hr        4.00             0.01                  0.30              0.002
                           7 hr  2      3.68             0.01                  0.36              0.002
                           1 day       3.00             0.05                  0.30              0.002
                           2 days      2.42             0.21                  0.26              0.002
                           3 days      2.13             0.37                  0.26              0.0015
                           5 2dajs      1.95             0.49                  0.26              0.002.
                           7 days      1.94             0.62                  0.24              b.002
                           9 days      1.94             0.68                  0.23              0.002
                           13 days     1.84             0.65                  0.26              0.001
                 3                                         9

                                                     TABLE- III
                                     AITALYSIS FOR OXIDIZ-ABLE INTERIC-DIATES
                                   FORIC-D DURING BIOLOGICAL HALF-CELL GROWTH
                                                   Titraticns  (14illiequivalents)  @or  10  ml   Sa=les
                           Time        pH            Sulfite           Thio2sulfate        PolythionatEs-
                          (days)     C*l   B*2      c         B         c      B         c         B
                            0      4.90
                                         4.80    0.0012    O.CO12    0.0022    0.0022  0.022     0.022
                            1      4.90  2.72    0.0012    0.0017    0.0005    0.0007  0.0190    0.026
                       2     2      4.90  2.35    0.0010    O.CO10    0.0007    0.0007  0.0190    0.026
                                   4.go  2.2o    0.0010    0.0010    0.0007    0.0007  0.0190    0.029
                            3
                            6      5.00  1.90    0.0012    0.0015    0.0007    0.0007  0.0190    0.019
                            a     9 '5. 00 1.87   0.0012    0.0015    0.0007    0.0007  0.0190    0.019
                            9      5.00  1450    0.0012    0.0015    0.0007    0.0007  0.0190    o.oi9
                           *1 Control  half   cell
                           *2 Biological half   cell
                                                           10

                                                                          r sulfite or
                                4            for the accumulation of eithe
                                   Evidence
                      thiosulfate ions over and above the control concentration which was
                      below 0.00015 meq/ml (Table III) was not obtained.
                                5.  There may have been a slight increase in the poly-
               2       thionate concentration in one biocell (Table III) during the second
                                                   -ntration
                      day of incubation.  The coace.        went from 0.0022 meq/ml to
                      0. 00,'z.G me
                               q/ml- on this day.  This change may be a'signi.'icant in-
                       crease. The control did not show a similar gain.  This polyth2ionate
                       concentration in the biocell subsequently rose to a high of
                       0.0029 meq/ml by the fourth day and then returned to control levels
                       of O-CO19 meq/ml.
                                 These analytical results show that T. thiooxidans utili-
                       zati= of  sulfur gave rise primarily to accumulation of sulfate ion.
                       If other intermediate2s are formed, their concentration levels are
                        essentially below the limit of these methods of.inorganic analyses.
                        Future analyses should be made for these intermediates on the sur-
                        face or inside of the cell
       3c                                          wall of these bacteria since they do not
                        appear to accumulate as metabolic products in the nutrient medium.
                          5           V.  Electrochemical Observations
                                  Skerman's medium with 1 per cent sulfur was placed in the
                        biological half cell  which in turn was set in a constant temperature

                         bath. The Daystrom-Weston recorder  was  connected  to  determine  in-
                         stantaneous27 changes in the half-cell  emf.  After  an  initial  ob-
                         servation period which showed the half-cell  emf  to  be  constant(the
                         air bubbling into the cell), the air was  replaced  with  pure  nitro-
                         geii.  The top cu2rve in Fig. 2 shows that the presence Iof  pure  nitro-
                         gen bubbling into the cell had little effect on  the half-cell
                         potential during this time period. This curve  as  well  as  those  that
                         follow are direct tracings from the  recorder  paper.  A  similar  ex-
                         periment in which the air in 'the bubbler was switched  to  pure  oxygen
                         indicated a slight, negligible reduction  in  2the  half-cell  voltage.
                                   After the Skerman's medium had  been  inoculated  with  T.
                         thioo,.Kidans and equilibrated with the air bubbling into  the  cell
                         a change from this air to pure oxygen  gave  an  i=ediate  change  in
                         the half-cell emf (third graph, Fig.  2).  The  remaining  curves  on
                         this page show that a change to air an2d nitrogen after the pure
                         oxygen has Ibeen bubbled into inoculated medium for a  time,  also  gave
                         changes in the biological half-cell emf.  Figure  3  shows  the  re-
                         producibility of the oxygen effect in the inoculated Skermanla medium.
                         These two curves were taken after the  biocell's  voltage  had  been
                         stabilized =der pure  nitrogen  app6roximately  3  hr.  Pure  nitrogen
                         raised and oxygen lowered the  inoculated  half-cell  emf.  The  ex-
                         tent of the gas effect under prolonged experimentation was observed
                                                      12

                         to depend udon the concentration of the inocul= as well as the
                         time period after inoculation.  Figure 4 gives an example of initial
                         and subsequent oxygen effects c7oserved in an inoculated  Skerman's
                         medium.
                                   The majority of the effects, obtained from using  the  pure
                         gases, took, place- --over- -a@ periiod@ of -several -minutes -i7a--thL- i=cul-ated-
                         Skerman's medium. Appreciable oxygen, nitrogen,  and  carbon  dioxide
                         effects on the biological half-cell potential were observed only
                         after the centrifuged, washed T. thiooxidans were placed in the
                         medium.  The latter effect, carbon dioxide, was not shown in2 the
                         graphs; however, it essentially duplicates the effect  observed  with
                         nitrogen.
                                   The ef f ex-t@ o@t- X-h=lgim.
                         atmosphere in equilibrium with the biological half cell  was  found
                         to be somewhat more complex when Skernnn's was replaced  with  ATCC
                         medium.  Switching f2rom pure oxygen to nitrogen caused changes
                         in the emf of both control and biological half cells.  The changes
                         in emf of the biological half cell were much greater than that ob-
                         servea with the control half cell.  The following  series'of  experi-
                         ments were initiated to individually, and then  collectively,  con-
                         sider the degree of the gas effect for e7ach constituent in the
                         ATCC medium.
                                                     13

                                 The large biological half cell with the platinum electrcde
                        was filled with approximately 600 ml of sterile distilled water.
                        High voltages of approximately -0.24 v were obtained for a pure
                        nitrogen atmosphere and a low of -0-30 v for pure oxygen atmosphere
                        were obtained with this electrode.  The half-cell emf'was allowed
                        to s2tabilize with pi)re oxygen bubbling into it before the individual
                        constituents of ATCC were added.  After the addition of an individ-
                        ual compound, the effects of the pure gases were determined by
                        allowing the voltage to stabilize.  This stability was identified
                        by recording voltages until no change in half-cell emf was observed
                        over a 10 min period.  The2n  the biocell was emptied and filled with
                        fresh sterile distilled water for the next constituent   Table IV
                        silTr,.-narizes in part the results obtained from these investigations.
                                 These individual constituents make electrochemical con-
                        tributions which in an oxygen atmosphere may bL- as high as -0.13
                        and as low as -0.426 v depending upon which one is selected.  Except
                        for calcium chloride and ferrous sulfate, the nitrogen and carbon
                        dioxide effects almost duplicate themselves.  Furthermore, it is of
                        interest to note that there was relatively little difference in the
                        nitrogen and oxygen effects except for KH2PO4.  To silr.Tnn ize, varia-
                        tions in partial p3ressures of carbon dioxide may affect the CaCl2
                        and Fel-:@04 contributions to emf, and variations in the nitrogen-oxygen
                                                    14

                                                  TABLR, IV
                              C-ASI-:OUS EFF-NTS ON ATCC COI.TSTITURLLTS AS I-T-ASL-RFD
                                              BY HALF-CELL DiF
                                                                  Stabilized  Half  Cell  E4F
                                                                      Pure Gases  (2v
                                           Coacentration
                                                                                            Oxygea
                              tituent
                         Cons                 (gm/l)           Carbon Dio-.ide  Nitro
                                                0.5                 -0.25        -0.20      -0.23
                         J-'!gSq4'1.H 20
      2                   CaCl                   0.25                -0.19        -0.10      -0.13
                              2
                         F e l,'O               0.03                -0.72        -0.41      -0.42
                              4
                         KH2PO4                 3.0                 -0.32        -0.38      -0.46
                          (NH4:)2SO4            0.2                 -0.23        -0.22      -0.24

                         pressures may affect the KH2PO4  contribution  to  an  emf.  Each of
                         these ccmpouads and pure water, except for FESO., contribute    electro-
                         chemical voltages which were found  to  be  significantly  higher in
                         the hydrogen scale series for  half-cell  potentials  than  have  been
                         observed with T. thiooxidans  oxidizing 2 sulfur  in  thelpresence of air,
                         i.e.  -0.6 to  -0.64 v.   The  half-cell.sensitivity  to  the  FESO  and
                                                                                          4
                         carbon dioxide  interaction were part of the  reason for eliminating
                         FESO  from the ATCC medium in subsequent studies.
                                   The individual behavior of  the  2constituents  in  ATCC
                         toward the various gases does not mean that such behavior is carried
                         over in the complex medium. In order  to  further  obtain  data  on  how
                         the half-cell emf may be aa'fected by these constituents, an experi-.
                         ment.,was conducted in which the half-cell emf was recorded     during
                         an arbitrary sequence of adding each constituent2 to sterile    distilled
                         water while  bubbling air into the mixture.  Table   V shows the stabi-
                         lized voltages that were  obtained  after  the  sequential  additions,
                         starting with FESO     During the experiment, the  time  for  the  half-
                         cell voltage to stabilize was observed to vary with the individual
                         components.  Approximately   47 min was necessary  for  1the  FESO  and
                                                                                          4
                         approximately 3-1/2 hr for   the KH2po4 addition  to  stabilize.   These
                         variations in voltage suggest that the initial electrochemical be-
                         havior of an ATCC medium may change if the  time  factor  is  not
                  ;7 7

                                                   TABLL@ V
                                ,TAU-Cr.LL Elg.,,S ruRII-IG SL,=TIAL  ADDITIONS
                                   OF ATCC CONSTITU,-@i':iTS (AIR A7LI@OSPKr---Rl','
                         Sequential Additions to              Sequential Stabilized Half-
                                       2                            Cell F,1,7's
                             Distilled Wate:@
                                   FESO                                  -0.36
                                       4
                                                                         -0.35
                                       4
                                                                         -0.34
                                 (NH
4                                    4)2SO4
                                                                         -0.29
                                   CaCI2
                                                                         -0.42
                                   KH2po4
                                                         17

                          sufficient for obtaining stability.  This fact may explain some Of
                          the variations that have been experienced in the past except for
                          one additi=al step in the procedure which should contribute towards
                          stability.  After the media were prepared and thoroughly mixed., they
                          were autoclaved for sterilization.  This step should!act as a stabi-
                         2 lizing or uniform aging factor.
                                   In general, a review of the stabilized voltages obtained
                          in this sequence shows that the resulting voltages are close together
                          having a low of -0.42 and a high of -0.29 v.  The addition of sterile
                          powdered sulfur to the final mixture and subsequent sterilized media,
                          did not change the electrochemical potential-of2 the media in the
                          half cell$.
                                   An assessment of the previous experimental results di
                          rected a study of changes in atmospheric composition in equilibrium
                          with the ATCC medium without its ferrous sulfate constituent, ATCC(-).
                          Figure 5 (top) shows that the short and long term operation of the
                          sterile ATCC(-) medium under an atmosphere of pure nitrogen resulted
                          in a relatively small and negligible change in half-cell emf as
                          compared to air.  After this determination, the nitrogen in the
                          sparger was switched to oxygen (Fig. 5, bottom) and again a negligible
                          change in half-cell emf was observed for the short and long term
                          treatment.  Thus, this medium responded to these two pure gases
                          like the Skerman's and not like the original ATCC medium.
                                                      18

                                  The next experimental sequence involved studying the
                         specific gas effects an the inoculated ATCC(-)  medium.  Figure  6
      4                  shows that the presence of T. thiooxidans  utilizing sulfur causes
                         an instantaneous decrease in the half-cell emf when the air
                                                                                      s effect
                         in equilibrium with the cell was changed to pure oxygen.  Thi
                         was similar to those observed in both the Skermnn's and ATCC media.
                         The ha lf-cell voltage, after 1. 2, and 4 hr, was higher  than  its
                         original value and appeared to stabilize at -0.30 v.  Similar treat-
                         ment with the inoculated Skerman's medium reduced th  half-cell
                                2                                             e
                         voltage and caused it to remain below its original value.
                                  In another inoculated biological half cell (Series  Lll)
                         that had been operating under a normal air atmosphere, the air was
                         changed to pure nitrogen (Fig. 7).  The short term effect of this
                         change was no'%, noticeable on the half-cell emf; howe2ver, the longer
                         ter= effect, 1 and 5 hr, was appreciable.  After  this  half-cell
                         emf had stabilized in the presence of pure nitrogen, a change to
                         pure oxygen was made (Fig. 8). In a relatively  short  period  of
                         tire, the half-cell voltage dropped to a value slightly below
                         that experienced in Series '.KLVII (Fig. 6).  Afte9r 2 hr this stabilized
                         half-cell emf obtained from this switch to oxygen (i.e.p after a
                         long term treatment with pure nitrogen) appeared to be different than
                                                     19
                                                                                    n7
                                                                77

                         the oxygen treatment of the air stabilized biological half cell
                         (Series LXVII). The latter gave a value of  -0.35  v  which  was  above
                         its initial cell emf while the former (Series Lll) gave a value
                         which was lower, -0-55 v.  Thus, the prolonged treatment wlth nitro-
      -"A                gen on this biological half cell (Series LII2) suggests that a
                         significant change from its-original character took-place.
                                               VI.  Discussion
                                   The analysis for the existence and accumulation of partially
                         oxidized sulfur intermediates did  not  reveal  any  concrete  evidence
                         for explaining the electrochemical  contribution  that  T.  thiooxidans
                         appears to ma2ke when added to  sterile  media.-  If  such  intetmediate
                                                                                               .s
                         exist, their concentratiQx3.g glre at or below the limit of analyses
                         developed in this study.  Other   sources, such as the surface or inside
                         of the T. thiooxidans' cell wall may make electrochemical contri-
   2                      butions.  Justification or encouragement to explore such possibilities
                         exist from this study.  The investigations on individual and co=bined
                         electrochemical investigations on the  compounds  comprising  the  ATCC
                         and ATCC(-)  identify  their  electrochemical  activity.  The  activity
                         of these ions reflected by their half-cell emfls especially with the6
                         ferrous sulfate eliminated from the nutrient, is higher in the hydro-
                         gea electromotive series  scale  than  experimentally  observed  during
                                                          20

                                                                          idans.  Thus
                      active bibicaical half-cell operation with T.  thioox
                                                     sm by its presence makes an electro-
                      the fact  that this microorgani
                      chemical contribution to the half cell  is further substantiate
                      through these investigations.
                2                The greater sensitivity of the   biological than the control
                      half-cell                                           t of the atmosphere
                                potential to changes in  the  oxygen-ccnten
                       and nutrient further suggests that viable T. thio@xidans is electro-
                       chemically active.  The actual individual or group of oxidized and
                       reduced comPoundScontributing 2to this electrochemical.  activity
                       must still be iso
                                        lated.
                                             Aclmowledgmeg@@
                                  The auth=e art-i-adebted.:L,,-
                                                                who acted as consultants
                        for identifying the electrochemical chax8,cte,--istic1s associated with
                        T. thiooxidans utilizing sulfur.
                                                       21

                                                REFERENCES
                         2.  Latimer, W. M., The Oxidation States of the Elements and Their
                               Potentials in Aqueous Solutions, Preatice-Hall,, Inc., p. 81
                               T1952).@
                         3.  Starkey., R. L., J. Bacteriology, 10, 135-163 (1925).
                         4.  Skermpn, V. B. D.) A Guide7 to Identification of the Genera of
                               Bacteria, Williams and Wilkins Company, p. 143-144 (1959).
                         5.  Trudinger, P. A., Aust. J. Biol. Sci., 17, p. 446-458 (1964).
                         6.  Iguchi$ A., Bull. Chem. Soc. Japan, 31, 597-600 (1958).

                                                                                 @ll'[:P%@IATIOt.IAL
                                                                                       CELL
                                                 CALOi@,,]El-                  P O'I'E i\1'1- I 0 iN.,'] E T E R
                          AGAR
                                               2         E @ ICE
                                               I % L
                        BRIDGE
                                               ELEC'F 'IODE
                                                                                             -F U 0
                                                                                VACIJUM                      0 U'I' f) u
                         C E L- I.- 0. I
             2                                                                     VOLI-i@/IE-I'Et@          RESIS'fOl@
                              -F I i\l (J @A
                         PL-A
                                                                                                                                   c 0  1)
                        ELECI-,'IODE
                                               2              -rci
                                                                                                 -!'A @l -F VOLTAGE
                                                                                          COI\IS
                                                                                              T 11 A t@l S t-- OR \!I E R
                        CELL- @10.2
                         I-J L AT I @,l U t!ll
                                -1@ODE
                        EL.-ECI
                                                                                                    120 V
                                                                                                      A.C.
                                                                                                     6 0
                                               1      FJ.g. I - 131.ock

                                                                                                                                               
43
                                             41
                                                                                                                                               
2                             4-1
                                                                                                                                               
'-tj
                                                                                                                                       2       
Pt
                                                                                                                                               
C   141
                                                                                                                         4                     
L3
                                                                                                                                               
tv

             L)
               -0 3
                                                                                                                                               
uliteil (",,cr,tiian's
                                                                                   Fig.         Consistency of tli(.-     OxY l,'c n L" f Ce c
LI no
                       2                                                                                                    I lll.'L
                                                                                                                                f -Cell
               -0
                                                                 ini-,o Cell
                                             0,@yffen Btibbled
                                     u     1                            c     lir
                                                           Ati,.iorl)licr
                                                                                                                                               
9
                                                                                       4                                6

                                                                                                              lojr
                                                                                                                 , OC
                                                                      ,IC-cc,-.,L pototiL.i.al- ACL
                                                   0..,CYGCI2I 1!"f.rect Oil li@ .I                                                       1. ..
                                         VIC,. 4                                             Sulf Ur)
                                                        Llii
                                                                             Lll-)bled
                  -0.3                                              oxygen   B
         2                                                             inlo cells
                            Air Atinospl-iere
             o
                  -0.4
              d
                                                           iie Media
                                                       Ster
                                                       Ill),-nedia-tel'Y After InoculatiOll
                   -0.5
                                                       Several Days  f,-fter Inoculation
                                                                                                      6            7
                                                                                          5
                                                                             4
                                                   2            3
                          0
     1                                                                             Lnutes)
                                                                           Tiine (M

                                                  A i
                                                                                  BLII)].).I.eft i.nio Cel.1
                       -o.:50
                                                                     Oyygen ]3ttl)bled into Cell.
                       -0-35
                             2                           o3eii ALitiosplici-c
                                                  N:L Lr
                       -0-40
                                                                                                                                               
-ibilizc(-l V,.tltte
                                                                                                    5                                          
(-I aiitt 2 hi-  ItLLr)
                       -0.45
                              0                                    2                  3                 4                  5                 6 
7

                   -0 .4
                                                     Air ALjiiospliere
                                                             0;,yl-.,,Cn BLtbbled iiito Co!'I-l
                                                                                                         14inut-,c,.)

                              CA
                                                                  t;i
                              C7,
                    ri

                                            i,1.1. Li, o'i)ti A I-IlitL),;Vtit-,.L-c
                                            0     ii 13Ltbbl.t-LI itilo Ct@]
                  -0.4
             U)
                                                                                                                     2              
S-Labilized Value
                                                                                                                                        (2 hr
later)
                                                      Fig. 8     Oxygeh Effect in Itioctil.a-ted AII'CC(-) 14oditun
                                                                  (Series III, Age       Six Days)
6                       0                             2              3              4              5              6
                                                                                        (TJ.me, A'-Ii.iiutes)

