                                                                                 11.3
    -"@-@-Office Memorandum*, UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
      TO       Chief, Technical Branch                           DATE: 30 September  1954
      FLOM
      SUBJECT:  National Neetings of the American Psychological Association
                    1.  The National Meetings of the American Psychological Association
               were-held in 2New York City, 3 through  8  September  1954.  The  progran
               includcd a good many-papers in clinical psychology and the features of
               this years meeting were the number'of symposia held.  In  order  to  ac-
               covmdate the  large number of people, two or three  symposia  were  held
               concurrently.  Thus., it was impossible to cover all papers of interest.
                    2.  In 2discussions with many psychologists, I found-there was
               increasing interest in hypnosis in the  colleges  and  more'experimental
               work was being done in this area although strangely  enough  there  were
               no  papers on this subject'at this meeting.
                    3.  Another field of interest which was reflected both in the
               papers and in private discussion was the use of drugs.  It is generally
               felt tha2t contributions to the theory and understanding  of  personalities
               can be made through the investigation of behavior under the  influence  of
               drugs and universities, particularly in,conjunction with medica.1  schools
               are carrying on research with many types.of  drugs  including  mescaline
               and LSD.  Apparently, LSD is easily obtainable.
                    4. In the symposimn, "Affects of Drugs on Behavio2r."  Dr.  G.  R.
               Wendt gave a paper in which he described the application of barbiturates,
               which he did not name, to students who were paid for  being  subjects.
               He administered both exhilarating and  depressive  drugs.  The  subjects
               were observed through one-way glass and were also checked by having
               them fill out a list ef adjectives. Thus, if a subject  checked  happy.,
               joyful, pleasant, etc., i2t was considered that the drug hqd  the  effect
               of exhilaration and if the subject checked angry, sad. etc.., it was
               considered to be depressive.  lihen'part of the subjects were given
               depressive drugs and part were given exhi2.arating drugs,  it  was-found
               that the effects of the exhilarating drugs were  decreased.  When  all
               were given exhilarating drugs each of the subjects seemed  to  2stimulate
               the others and, hence, there wasan  enhanced  effect.  In  questioning,,
               after the paper, Dr. Wendt was somewhat evasive and  answered  criticism
               by saying you can't have a simple-minded explanation, that  drugs  had
               uniisual effects.
                    5. 14array Jorvik gave a paper on the "Use of  Drugs  in  General,"
               classifying theni into exhilarating, depressive, patho-g0enic and  mis"
               cel3.aneous.  Under the heading of'patho-genic drugs, he included
               mescaline, I&SD-Lysereic Acid, and adrenochrome and indicated that there
               was increasing interest and more experimentation with patho-genic drugs.

                     6.  covin Kornetsky presented  a paper on the "Effects of  Iiith-'
                drawal in Drug Addiction" on patients  at  the  Lexington  Hospital.
                Nothing of interest to-our program was presented.
                     T.  Daniel Wilner  gave a paper on 'Drug  Addiction  in  Juveniles
                in New Tork City." Although interesting2  there  was  no  pertinen2t  in-
                formation for our purposes.
                     8.  Dr. Joseph Zubin, who also has done work with drugs, was
                Chairman of this symposium.  He  again  indicated  the  increasing-in-
                terest-in experimentation with drugs.
                     9. In another symposium,  Dr.  Fred  Brmme  described  an  experi-
                ment in which the Rorshach test was administered  to  -subjects  under
                2the influence of ISD.  He found that the tests thowed differences from
                normal state and under the influence of this  drug  the  subjects  were
                self-critical and interpreted their own scores.
                     10.  Dr. tiebster of PcGill University described to  me  a  research
                project carried out by the Canadian  Army.  This  research  was  alluded
                to in the presidential address at  the  conve2ntion.  Students  who  were
                paid $20.00 a day were used as  subjects.  In  the  experiment  they
                attempted to eliminate as far as possible all sensations.  The students
                were blindfolded and their 'ears were covered with'foam rubber and their
                feet and hands were covered with large mits and  they  were  placed  in
                soundproof rooms. However., oLt the request of the  subject,  they  could
        2        have as much water and as much food as they  wanted  and  could  sleep'as
                much as they wanted on a  comfortable  bed.  Also,  when  requested,
                childish rhymes would be read to them. In the  early  phase  of  the  ex-
                periment., a humming noise was induced but  this  was  discontinued.  The
                subjects tended to lose their sense of time.  They became very irritable
                and requested time after time to hear the simple childish rhymes.  None
                of the subjects held out longer than a  week.  This  experiment  gets  at
                some of the psychological factors  found  in  prisoners-of-war  treatment
                where the individual is completely  isolated  in  solitary  confinement.
                     3.1. Dr. Albert Ax from the VIishiiigton University  School  of
                Medicine, presented a paper on the  quantitative  effects  of  sleep
      2          deprivation. Students acted  as  subjects.  The  sleep  deprivation  was
                moderate--eight hours. Other  subjects  were  disturbed  during  their
                Bl.eeping period and the controlled group had undisturbed sleep.
                Loss of sleep and disturbed  sleep  lowered  test  scores.  Interesting
                tests, however, causing greater motivation, shovied less  loss  in  score
                and there was a tendency to compen1sate  for  fatigue-by  greater  effort.
                     12.  Another paper was presented on the psycliolor,
                                                                          ical-effects
                of starvation with hard physical work.  This work was done in the
                Laboratory of Physiological Hygiene at the  University  of  I-limesota.
                                               -2-

               Twelve conege-male students fasted for four and one-half days.
               However., water intake was not restricted.  They worked for several hours
               on a treadmill apparatus.  This showed a decrease in physical tests
               but there was no decrement in intellectual test scores.  The subjects
               showed quick response to emergency rations.  The Above two experiments
               are also along tho lines of treatment of prisoners o2f war but do not
               go far enough.
                    13.  Another interesting paper was the following up on the
               occupational success of Air Force Cadets who took test in 1943-44 and
               it was found in most instances that high scores were associated with
               occupational Success in civilian life.
                    14.  Other papers were attended in the climical and industrial
               area but 0the papers were of technical or general interest.

