                                                            September 27, 1966
                           Dear
                                       Enclosed you will find 4 sample 1,"o-Snag Tags and a
                           catalc gue.   --   .j They did not send the thru pins. As you can
                           s;ee from the enclosure, these ta.gs can be marked by a factory
                           process to embed the numerals.
    2                                   We had a question
                                                                There are several means to re-
                           duce this-
                                       6    orient the tag parallel to the direction of travel
                                       0    add a triangle-sl;iped stiffe--ilig piece to t-r-e tag lobe
                                       0    add a .vire reinfor2cement men!iber
                                            have tags made with t%vo pin-thru holes, or glue two
                                            tags together end to end.  I have glued the    'tags
                                            together with neoprene cement - this ce-,,nent being
                                            'lex'ble
                                       Despite the fact that it:- would seer-q very si2mple td cast tags of
                            of one's preferred'shape, I feel that there is already a good bit of design
                            value in the pr.-sent models, particularly with respect to the pin-thru seal
                                       Please advise us if these are satisfactory, ancl if you would M-a
                            the matter to be pursued further.
                                                                 Yotirs truly,
                                                                                                            7D

                                         "'7 --- - ---
                                                            September 27, 1966
                       Summary Wormation on
                       1.    There are
                                                                          @@@e standard is set by
                             a cat owned by.
                             Other breeders have, and are,   trying to introduce a variation o2n the
                             standard, and the effe4ct of this change on certain'
                             ig open to question.                                      ,Iproperties
                       2.            are difficult to breed, appirently th'e females do not corceive
                             readily, and'usuauy  have only one or two kittens per Utter.
                       3.    There are very....         -tin th?,, cou'nt'ry - t)robably  jrt Ihe
                             most.  Of these, I would eitimate that'
                                                                          -lare show  stock.
                       4.    The going price for show  stock is fror.-i $150. 00 and u'p.
                       5.           \breeder s are apparently more.pre-w-alent, and they offer true
                       2                                     and var'iations on the theme. Again,
                             %vhether         chiia6teii@tics vary is unknown to me.
                             T@e price for an                          lis around $30. 00.  They
                             travel well, and @if'@'n'e" were interested 11-1 immediate supply, t)iis
                9             Nvc--ild be the preferred route until a domestic breeder could be
                             established.
                       6.    Dealers who have acquired a reputation for quality stock:

                                                                            AGEL
                                                        2-
                    7.    Dealers of unknown reputation, but with
                    8.    Persoris contacted by me-.
                          a.
                                - Authority on most show breeds.
                                - Located in
                                - Is going to send 2rne a              ok on abvssiafis.
                          b.                 A@o!n gto  sendMA a list of W. Cczst breeders.
                                                                              0;
                          co                             @to sehd'me pictures        cats.
                    9.    Knokvn available show quality
                    10.   Other names    uncontacted7:
                          In summary,  we will gladly pursue any aspect of the problem. Fo r
                    immediate supply,  I recommend:
                          a.    Acquiring, "as pets",
                          b.    Acquiriner copies of'                      m,@-azines for listin,7s
                                        t3,
                                of stippliers, or contacting

                                                                           AML
                    Alk
                                                      -3-
                         Cy    Establishing a supplier, here. but having to walit for at least
                                   year or more.
                               one
                                                  uppuers in the country.
                   There may,   in fact# be other s
   2                      The owner/breeder/fanciers are very interested and inquisitive aboA.1
                                                                   cr this breed.
                   the caller's experience and motives for acquirin,,
                         We will try to get a copy of C-at Magazine and AU Pets Magazine.  In
                   the meantime, please contact me if you need more specifics.
                    Post Scrip,.: Will you please 2do me a great favor and send
                                                                               iL you have a
                                                                  article on
                                        lis @oing so much for mi(Uke arranging for me to
                                 s ez         before buying,one), that I would Uke to return
                                 the favor.
  0                                         40

