                                     Defend the Constitution!
                                          Neutralize the CIA!
                                      Second Annual Rally Against CIA Terrorism
                                          Memorial Union - Nov. 16 - 12:00 PM
                                                          featuring
                                                         Philip Agee                           pro-,jed for Re2lea5e..
                                                                                             AP
                                                     Former CIA Officer                      Date
                                         Author, Inside the Company: CIA Diary
                                                 Summary of CIA Abuses:
                 o Underprojcct.%IK-ULTRAandrelatcdprograms,theClAanditsresearchersdru                   2     edagen-
                   cv operators, prisoners, mental patients, and college students with LSD  and  other  drugs,  often
                   %%Ithout their knowledge or consent. At least several people died as a result of  this  cxperimcn-
                   tation, yet the complete details of the  program  remain  unknown  today  since  Agency  ofricials
                   destroyed most 2of the filcs in the cariv 70's.
                 o The CIA'attcmpted'to  assassinate  T@ene  Schneider  (CAiiie),  Patrice  Luiiiuniba  (Congo),  Ngo
                   Dinh  Diem  (Vietnam),  and  Rafael  Trujillo  (Dominican  Republic),  according  to  the   Church
                   Committee  investigation.  More  recently,  in  Veil:  Secret  Wars  of  the  CIA,  Bob   Woodward
                   reported that  the  CIA  had  arranged  an  attempt  to  assassinate  Shcilik  Mohammed  Fadlallah
                   on March 8,19,S5, unintentionally killing 80 people and wounding another 200.
                 9 In early 1984, the CIA mined the harbors of Nicaragua in direct violation of  Article  1,  Section
                   8 of the Constitution. Ldtcr that 2year, it distributed an assassination  manual  in  violation  of
                   Presidential Exccuti%,c Order #12333.  These  and  other  actions  were  condemncd  by  the  World
                   Court in 1980 as violating international law.
                 o According to former CIA analyst Jesse Leaf,  the  CIA  provided  training  in  torture  techniques
                   to the Shah's secret police in Iran, precipitating the "Iranian Hostage Cris2ie of 1979.
                 * According to  the  Church  Committee  report,  the  CIA  has  covertly  produced,  subsidi7Cd,  or
                   sponsored 'well over one thousand books',  effectively  %vaging  a  propaganda  camp@lign  against
                   the American people. The most  recent  known  case  of  CIA  sponsorship  occurred  in  1985  when
                   the Agcncv ptid a Harvard profe9ssor approximatclvs 109,000 to writes2ulAral)ii, The
                   f(,r Secu@a,. No niention Nvas inadc in the book of the CIA's involvement.

