                                                                   -ence potential of
                     Description:  The investigation of the intallio
                                ionB-@'emphasizing
                                                . an anal,@,tical -tudij of the intrinsic
                          -nicat:
                     capability of m= as arbocormunica,.lons.syst2em and also  an  invesl%..i-
                     gatio-n of the conditions Wnereby his ca3,ibility can be enhanced or
                     aug--enlv-ed.
                     ckground:  This stucly has demonstrated that man modulates
                     Ba
                           sgnal s                               Based on  these  findl-igs,
                                      2                                     -irelated el-c-rical
                     o e "c-iR Ra                                 sing
                     n       Y       the pq@ential exists of  sen
                     simn-1s'                          is ,tork wi3.1 undertake a'horough
                                                     Th                          %I
                     investigation of the signal "ihrough--ut" by the use of time correlation
                     analytical techrirues.
                     Description:  Develop                               itechniques for
                     detecting and analyzing electrical events associated with brain acatl-ivity
                                                                          M
                     Bac'ground:  This organization has assembled a sy@@@ -t-o-det;-,r,-.,.,iile-the
                     EF          @charac@eristics of the hilman body.
                                                                     ;elrer, the speci.A6icity
                                                                  Ho,
                     and hence u,.ility-of this effect" remains iir@.@nown.  tstaff members
                     have been invited to 2use this equipment at no cost to varify the results
                     and to define the experimental protocols necessary to isolate and inter-
                     prelw event related signals, particularly those  relating  to  hearing.
                     Depending upon the results of initial tests, follow-on definitive work
                     may be reco=e-,ided.
                                          .[in House
                     Description:  Work will be undertaken2 in-house to apply existing tech-
                     niques-of image enhancement and  image  scanning,  together  with  data
                     processing techniques, to establish  the  uniqueness  of  iris  pigment pat- e...
                     terms in the human eye.  Problems of range and resolution wi-U be
                     investigated.
                     Backarou,-ld:  Preliminary work using tlae      findicates th6at there is a
                     large        of ar@atc=ic:al data i,-i the l@u-ma:ii'lris.  Pattern conj'igura-
                     tions and pigment distribution strongly suggest individual.uniquenes- of
                       '@"h=an iris.  If successful the method could be used to
                     the
                     -)U.-ibud,@-eted

                                 ML
                    Z,L--:.T A:-D
                    Description: The  research  will  focus  o,.i  studyin-  technicue3  to  alter
                    the                                 The major research quest,;-on bein,-,,  asked
                    is i-fte'ther behavior will cha-n-ge as a result of changes in,
    2                          ,that were achieved throug.h  the  use  of  conditioning  tec'.Iinicaes.
                    Background:  The  above  research  is  a  Phase  II  follow-on  oriented   toward
                    the  study  of  behavioral  manipulation  techniques.  Fnase  I   was   directed
                    toward the identification of,_         -@iesponses  as  they  relate  to  positive
                    and  neaative 2 stimuli.   The   class   research  has  the  potential  o'   being
                    a  powerful  tool  in  the  detection of  induced  behavioral  changes,  e.g-.,
                    "brain washing."
                    Psychobiology  of IJonotony
                    Descri-ption:  The purpose of this research is to validate       techniques
                    found to be useful in detecting tolerance to monotony and        sensor2y depriva-
                    tion. These  measures  will  be  validated  in  three  i.,-orking  conditions:  1)
                    a desk job  with  monotonous  work  ar-d  very  little  social  interaction,  2)
                    work involving moderate routine and interaction, and 3) work iihich
                    requires aL'..iustment to  a  considerable  variety  of  activities  and  nearly
                    constant s2ocial interaction.  Foreign-born translators, translator-
                    interpretors, and interpretor-gaides will be used for 1, 2, and 3
                    respectively  since  they  are  representative  of  certain  groups  and   condi-
                    tions  found  in  the  Agency.  Data  will  be  collected  on  tolerance  measures
                    and criteria measures such as modes of copi.-ig, perfor-,iance, and job
              2      satisfaction.
                    Background:  Prior  research  on  monotony  or  boredom  has   focused   primarily
                    on vrhat happens in various forms of extended isolation.  I-Ionotony in
                    less drastic situations  can  also  lead  to  discomfor@'  and  demotilration.
                    There are a number of   positions in  the  Agency  iqhich  demalnd  a  relatively
       2             high  degree  of  tolerance  to  monotony.  Persons  assigned  to  these   Dosi-
                    tions should have  both  tolerance  for  and  an  effective  means  of  coping
                    with monotony.
                    Consultant  in  Assessment  and   ESP
                    This vill  be  a  continuation  of  a  personal  services  contract  to  provide
                    consultation  in  the  areas  of  (a)  extra  sensor2y  perception,  (b)  indirect
                    assessment,  and  (e)  narcotics  control.  The  activity  is  oriented  to  'oro-
                    viding  information  on  current  or  incipient  developments  in  these   fields.
                    Back,-round:  The consultant,                          has -oroved to be a
                    valuable consult@ant because  of  his  close  contact  i-iith  researchers  in'the
              4      field of ESP and his  past  ex-per4Aence  in  the  area  of  indirect  assessment
                                                        6

