                     THE COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION TliEORY ASPECTS
                                     OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
                                                 By
                                           Eugene Agalides
                                             Head of the
                                Biophysical Communications Laboratory
                                         Paper presented at the
                      17th Annual Co2nference in Engineering in Medicine and Biology,
                                  November 18, 1964, Cleveland, Ohio
                                                                       Appro-ved f or
                                                                       DatO
                                      General Dynamics/Electronics
                                  Biophysical Communications Laboratory
                                          Research Departmen4t
                                          Rochester, New York

                       THE COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION THEORY ASPECTS
                                        OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
                                                     by
                                               Eugene Agalides
                        Paper presented at the 17th Annual Confereiice in Engineering
                        in Medicine and Biology, November 18, 1964, Cleveland, Ohio.
                         The quest for a quantitati2ve expression of natural phenomena has
                      lead, in communication theory, to the definition of a quantity of infor-
                      mation.  The fact that information theory is today applied to several
                      fields other than electrical communications underlines its importance.
                      Information theory fulfills the needs of these various fields for quanti-
                      tative organization because they present characteristics very similar
  2                    to those of telecommunication.  In the case of the nervous system,
                      for instance, communication is present in the form of impulses
                      (stimuli) conveyed to the central nervous system (CNS) for integration,
                      detection, and computation, or from the CNS to the effectors (muscles,
                      internal glands, etc.
                          Having established the link between information theory and the
             2         biophysical sciences, we are led to regard the central nervous system
                      as a gigantic information processing device.
                          There are two ways to consider the phenomenon of nervous communi-
                      cation.  First, it may be thought of as a problem in communication itself
                      *This research is sponsore jointly by the Air Force Office of Scientific
                                                                                AF 849(638)
                      Research, Information System Directorate under Contract             -1185,
                      by the Office of Naval Research, Biology Branch under Contract Nonr 3993(00);
                      and by General Dynamics/Electronics, Research Department.

                                                        2
                       in which noise is to be eliminated from the message content through the
                       application of coding and redundancy. Second, nervous communication
                       may be thought of as a problem in data processing where the messages
                       must be stripped of their redundant parts in, order to be accommodated
                       in the CNS.  These two problems are not cont2ra@ictory.  The first one
                       concerns the retrieval of information from noise; i.e. , the coding of
                       information to be transmitted, with a consequent increase in reliability.
                       The second problem concerns the processing of data or the coding of
                       the source information so that redundancy is eliminated.  As an analogy,
                       the transmission of English language over a noisy channel can be
           2            considered.  Before messages are transmitted on the line, all re -
                       dundancies pertaining to the language have to be removed; when
                       this is done, the messages could be coded to combat noise.
                           The duality of this problem might raise the question: Why does an
                       organism need an elaborate coding scheme if only the pertinent infor-
                       mation is used by its CNS? The answer could lie in t2he possibility
                       that the data proce ssing is not done only at the CNS but also in the
                       ganglions present along the transmission path.  Thus, there would be
                       a great need for efficient coding close to the periphery of the sensorial
                       mechanism.  As the information travels up to the CNS, this need might
                       diminish as far as the processing is concerned.  But, processing is
                       sti6ll needed as far as the noise is concerned s@-nce it is reasonable to

                                                           3
                      assume that the  noise  increases  as  the  information  approaches  the
                      CNS.  (Noise,  as  used  here,  means  all  unwanted  information   con-
                      verging on the CNS at the same time as the wanted information.)
                          To illustrate this attributed quality of the ga'nglion, it  is  only
                      necessary to recall that a constant s2timulus, after a certain period of
                      time, does not elicit a response in the neuron.  We may postulate that
                      this  saving  in  transmission  is  accomplished  by  an   accommodation
                      phenomenon in the nervous system.
                           In order to understand  the  processes  involved  in  neuron  firing,
                      various mathematical models have been evolved such as those by
                      Goldstein,l Rosenblith,2 and Agalides.3  Goldstein and Rosenblith
                      have represented neuron activity  as  a  resultant  of  the  summation  of
                      responses from a whole population of nervous fibers exhibiting the
                      same characteristics.  This approach leads to a microscopic view of
                      neural mechanism.4  Thu's, a modified shot noise effect is brought in
                      the picture.
                           To organize the amount  2of  data  available  and  to  extricate  from
                      the apparently random  nature  of  the  data  the  statistical  parameters
                      necessary for the understanding of the processes at hand, constitute
                      another scientific challenge.  We might mention along these lines the
                      contribution already given by spectral analysis to the interpretation of
                      data, as expounded by Wiener5 and Brazier,6 w1here autocorrelation

                                                   4
                  techniques have helped to detect low frequency phenomena in Electro-
                  Encephalography and to assign different locking frequencies for the
                  various rhythmic activities of the brain (a -rhythm - 10 cps, P -rhythm
                   20-25 cps, 'Y -rhythm= 40 -60 cps, 5 -rhythm = 1-2 cps, e-rhythm
                  4-7 cps, k (kappa) -rhythm -L, 10 cps).
                      Throughout the experimental work on the nervous system, both
                  macroscopic and microscopic considerations tend to influence the
                  development of theoretical explanations in nervous transmission in
                  separate, although well-defined, directions.  In both cases, we are
                  led to consider the problem of coding and redundancy.  These concepts
                  arise when we study the ability of a rece2iver to detect accurately the
                  nature of the message being sent in the presence of interferring noise.
                  In applying information theory to the nervous system, this problem
                  becomes complicated by two factors not usually encountered in usual
                  telecommunication practice.  One, already mentioned above, reflects
                  the difference between macroscopic and microscopic phenomena.
                  The other, which is6 perhaps more complex involves the presence of
                  both spatial and temporal effects in coding.
                      It may be said that the presence of both macroscopic and micro-
                  scopic points of view should not necessarily lead to a conflict.  This
                  is true in thermodynamics where the former leads to analysis on the
                  basis of ensemble averages, whereas the latter illustrates the dynamics

                                                         5
                      of individual particles. The study of the nervous system  is  virtually
                      carried out on this dual basis. However, if we  want  to  analyze  com-
                      munication in the nervous system from the point of view  of  coding,  a
                      conceptual difficulty arises because coding and redundancy  do  not  by
                      necessity belong to either a macroscop2ic or a microscopic mode.
                                   6
                      Dr. Brazier, in affect, has suggested that the existence  of  a  multi-
                      coding scheme in the nervous system might explain the conveyance of
                      both temporal and spatial information.
                          The existence of multicoding in the transmission of stimuli to the
                      central nervous system and the macroscopic and microscopic aspects
                2      of stimuli transmission are studied. The approaches  to  the  study  of
                      these aspects of stimuli transmission are:
                           1.  Microscopic Approach.  The transmission of equal stimuli
                               along different individual fibers of the same  nervous  bundle
                               are studied, and a signal is observed as it travels along  the
                               path of the nervous bundle and as it is interpreted by2 the
                               central nervous system or an integrating organ.
                           2.  MacroscoLic Approac       The transmission  of  equal  stimuli
                               along different nervous bundles is studied again with
                               observation of a signal as it travels along an integrating
                               path, and an analysis is made of the signal as it is interpreted
                               by the central ne8rvous system or an integrating organ.

                                                        6
                         Two types of coding are investigated.  In the microscopic approach
                     we attempt to verify that the signal traveling along similar fibers is
                     not necessarily transmitted by similar coding or modulating schemes,
                     but that a multitype of coding is used to provide better noise recording
                     properties.  In the macroscopic approach we are con2cerned with the
                     integration of possible different codes along a complex nervous path,
                     again with a possible gain in information capacity through improved
                     noise contributing properties.
                             The two approaches have been defined above in broad terms.
                     Note that we have not mentioned the problem of distinguishing between
                     temporal and spatial types of coding.  This is because we ar2e only
                     concerned here with the problem of "how" the stimuli are being coded,
                     not with "what" is being coded. This latter  problem  could  only  be
                     studied after some definite forms of coding  have  been  established.
                     To find these coding forr@s we neglect, as a first approximation,
                     another aspect of nervous communication; i. e. , the  orientation  of
                     neural struc8tures.
                              It is evident that the outlined approaches are of a  general
                     nature.  As we consider the vast array of neural structures, we find
                     differences in functions.
                              In the nervous system we are faced with two problems derived
                     from the specific needs of information transmission.  One is to find how

                                                        7
                     to obtain maximum efficiency.  The other is how to obtain minimum
                     equivocation.  The first problem calls for making maximum use of
                     the capacity of the transmission channels.  The second is to find the
                     way to -minimize the noise effect, environment, and threshold vari-
                     ation in order to overcome equivocation or misunderstanding.
      2                   In the first case, a multiple coding system would be beneficial.
                     Here the term "multiple" means not only the coding in itself but also
                     the system as such.  For example, the use of pulse position modulation,
                     pulse duration modulation, and pulse amplitude modulation could be
                     one way to solve the problem of transmitting three different messages
                     over one and the same channel.  The effect o2f noise and the resulting
                     equivocation could be determined by using three or more types of
                     coding systems for one and the same message.  Each coded message
                     could then be transmitted over separate channels or over a single
                     channel, depending on the reliability required.  See Fig. 1.
                          A particular noise at a time "t" will not affect all three different
                     modulation system2s in the same way and to the same degree.  Three
                     types of modulation and two types of noise are shown in Fig. 2. Any
                     one of the noise types will not affect in the same way a pulse duration
                     modulation system, a pulse position modulation system, and a pulse
                     amplitude modulation system.
                          Figure 3 shows a modulation system with three degrees of freedom.
                          For a modulation syst8em with three degrees of freedom, the
                     modulated wave can be represented by:

          pplp-
                                                                          8
                                                                             Filtering
                                                                                  and
                                                                             Detection         Coincidence and
                                                                  Channel x                   2 Decision Element
                                                                                   DI
                                 Transmission
                                      Point           Noise
                         In                                       Channel z                              Information
                                                        N                                           c        OUT      10
                                                   2               c
                                                                                    D
                                                                                    3
                                                                  System I
                                                                             Fiitei-ing
                                                                                  and
                                                         2                    Detection         Coincidence and
                                                                                               Decision Element
                                 Transmission                                      D,
                                       Point    Combined Channel
                         Infc                         x +z +k                                       c    Information  10
                            IN                          2                                                     OUT
                                                     System II
                                 Fig. 1. Multichannel multicoding and unichannel-multicoding
                                             transmission and reception systems.
                         (PDM)   x
                         (PPM)   z                                                   K3V3               Kiv                  K zvz
  2                       (PAM)   k
                            N.oise
                         (Type  A)                                                               L
                                                                                                         T
                             Noise                             n n n
                         (Type  B)
                         Fig. 2. PDM, PPM, PAM, and two                             Fig. 3. Pulse 7modulation with
                                     types of noise transmitted                                three degrees of freedom
                                     simultaneously.                                            (applying PDM, PPM, and
                                                                                                PAM at the same time).

                                                                9
                                                         t 0    t K V (T n)    2An
                                                 M (t)          + 0  3 3     + -
                                                         T          T           T
                                                         2AnK3V3 (Tn)      o    2
                                      2                +                +  z         [i + K3V3 (Tn)]
                                                                T          M=l M -rr
                                                         sin   mw     + A ] Cos (nu") t    niw B
                                                                c         n           c       c n
                        where
                                                         2An     -KIV, (Tn- K2V2 (T  n)
                                                                         2
                                                                KIV, (Tn) + K2Vz (T  n)
                                                         Bn     -
                                                                         2
                                                                *  +B     K IV, (T
                                    2                            n     n          n
                                                                *n -An   K?.Va (T n)
                                                                1  d
                                                     a,, (n)    -    [I + K3V3 (T     dt
                                                                Ty                n
                                                                  c
                   2                                             1 + K3V3 (Tn)
                                                                             to +   2An
                                                                    T
                                                                2 [1 + K3V
                                                         (n)             .1 (Tn)]
                                                         m           MT2r
                                                                sin n-iw  [to  + A   cos niw  B
                                                                      c   2                  c  n
                                                                2 [1 + K3V3 (T
                                                     b  (n)
                                                         m          MTr
                                                         8                            t
                                                                s i rk,)cBnsin rnwc  0  +A  n]
                                                                                     2

            Popp'
                                                           10
                        The unmodulated pulses are ideal rectangular pulses with  time  dur-
                        ation top amplitude unity, and repetition period T. The leading edge
                        is modulated with modulation factor K, and the trailing edge with a
                        modulation factor Ka.  VI (t) and V. (t) are independent modulating
                        wa2ves; n = 0, ± 1, ± 2; and Tn, and Tnz denote the respective  times
                        in the nth period that VI(t) and V. (t) are sampled. We  may  assume
                        that Tn, = Tn. = Tn,  With uniform sampling, Tn, P Tn,  , .  .  . Tnn
                        can be replaced by Tn.  The terms am(n) and bm(n) are constants
                        over any one period T, but may vary from period to period.  Also
   2                     w c = 2 Tr / T.  F inally, K. 3is a modulation factor applied to the amplitude
                        of the pulse.
                            A modulation form prevalent in living organisms is Pulse Repetition
                        Rate Modulation (PRRM).  This type of modulation is a digital equivalent
                        of the frequency modulation of an analog signal.  A form of pulse
                        repetition rate modulation is found in the 2sp@nal cord.  In the skin
                        receptors, transmission of stimuli seems to occur in the form  of  a
                        pulse position modulation system.  Graded signals in the nervous
                        system seem to belong to an amplitude modulation system.
                             We can now state that in complex living organism like vertebrates
                        there are many modulation systems used for transmitting information.
                        In 6addition there are different types of coding. The name of  multi-
                        dimensional coding could be applied to the form in which different
                        coded signals are transmitted over one and the same channel. at the same
                        time.

                       Brazier mentioned the multitude of codes existing in the nervous sys-
                 tem at the 1960 Moscow Conference on Higher Nervous Activity.  It can be
                 shown that the multiple coding system represents an economy in the trans-
                 mission channels in the case of different §timuli.  On the other hand,.if the
                 same stimulus is transmitted by a multi-channel multi-coding system, there
                2 is a definite advantage as compared with the transmission of the stimulus
                 by a single coding system.  This is true regardless of how good a single
                 coding system can be because it can be one of the multiple coding systems.
                       To ascertain the existence of different types of codes, we investigated
                 the response of different stimuli on the skin sensory receptors.  The first
                 receptor to be -studied was the Pacinian Corpu2scle (Fig. 4).  Agalides com-
                 pared the elicited responses to mechanical and acoustic stimuli.7  The
                                                                    f7
                         Fig. 4.  Photomicrograph of a Pacinian Corpuscle, 4OX.
                                  (Nikon Interference Phase Microscope, Nikon
                                  Microflex Camera, Tri-Pan-X Kodak Film;
                                  exposure time2, 0. 5 sec.)

        ppo-
                                                          12
                     difference between the formamplitude and latency involved for each response
                     was shown (Figs. 5, 6, 7). The power and frequency  curves  of  the  trans  -
                     ducers were plotted.  There is a definite difference between the response
                     of the same receptor to mechanical and to acoustical stimuli.  This was an
       2              investigation in vitro.  If the coding in the nervous system in vivo should be
                     studied, then either gross recording electrodes or microelectrodes can be used.
                                                                     Him
                                                                                   ME-E,
                     Fig. 5.  Impulses from a Pacinian Corpuscle; stimulus, mechanical
                              pressure; vertical scale, 220 @Lv/division (large scale);  horizontal
                              scale, 10 ms/division (large scale).
                                                   Stimulus
                                                                                              St ulus
                     Figs. 6 and 7.   Effect of acoustical wave pressure  on  Pacinian  Corpuscle.
                                      B and K heterodyne oscillator and amplifier; 70 cps,
             2                         keyed; 100 v rms on the piezo-electric acoustic transducer,
                                      one electrode grounded.  Recorded between the Pacinian
                                      Corpuscle and first node of Ranvier and the axon of the
                                      sensory receptor at a distance of 7 mm from the corpuscle.
                                      Vertical scale, 10 @Lv/division (large scale); horizontal
                 0                     scale, I ms/division (large scale).

                                                   1 3
                   The damage done to the surrounding cells by inserting electrodes into
                   the nervous system cannot be overlooked.  Another approach for
                   studying in vivo coding processes in living organisms is via an in-
                   vestigation of the electrical activity of electric fishes.
                      Figure 8 shows some representatives of gymnotid fishes from
                   trop2ical and equatorial South America and mormyrid fishes from
                   tropical and equatorial Africa.  Some of the fishes having electric
                   organs use them for offensive and defensive purposes.  These are
                   strong electric fishes whose discharge can paralize prey or at least
                   scare away enemies.  Torpedo Nobiliana, a marine electric fish,
                   can discharge electric pulses of some 220 volts.  The short-circuit
                   c2urrent of an adult Torpedo can reach 50 amperes.  The output
                   capabilities of Electrophorus Electricus, the Electric Eel, (Fig. 9),
                   a fresh-water electric fish, were studied.  Voltage discharges of
                   over 600 volts were mea@ured.  The maximum current at 10 ohms
                   load resistance was close to one ampere.  The pulse peak power was
                   around 100 watts.
                       There are 2other electric fishes, called weak electric fishes,
                   which use electric coded impulses for navigation and communication
                   purposes.  Pulse shape and pulse duration are very different de-
                   pending on species.
                       The electric eel has three electric organs, each of which per-
                   forms different functions.  One is called the main electric organ and

                                                 14
                          Mormyridie                                GymnotWas
               HyperoP sus
                 bebe                                                              hmemani
                    rmyrus                                                         vmrftn
                  kannume
                                         2                                   Stemarchorhynchus
                cu                                                             airyrhynchus
                                                                           Gymnorhamphichd7s
                t*rmyrops   ngert                                                 hyposwmus
                                                        2                             carapo
                 attenuatus
                                                                                 Eigenmannis
                                                                                   macrops
                Gym
                  niloticus
               Figure 8.  Representative types of the Mormyridae and Gymnotidae.
                          Th5e convergent evolution between these unrelated families
                          is expressed in terms of their electric discharges, reduction
                          of the tail fin, propulsion through an elongated unpaired fin,
                          development of long snouts, and several other features.

                                                   1 5
                            Fig. 9.  Electrophorus Electricus (electric eel).
               produces high voltage pulses used for stunning purposes.  Another electric
               organ, called the organ of Hunter, is used for communication and navi-
               gation purposes.  A third electric organ, called the organ of Sachs, is
               thought to have an auxiliary function and its electric discharge is 2much
               weaker than that of the main electric organ.
                     By studying the form and shape of the coded impulses, we can dis-
               tinguish a large variety of coding systems (Figs. 10, 11).  Gymnarchus
               Niloticus, an electric fish from equatorial and tropical Africa, studied
                                               8
               in detail by Lissman and Machin , is one of the most sensitive electric
               f2ishes.  It can sense any disturbance of the surrounding water produced
               by objects.  It can distinguish between electric conductors and micro-
               conductors.  Charges of the electric field of 0. 03 @tv/cm produced by
               direct currents can be detected by Gymnarchus Niloticus.  Its receptor
               system operates in the second derivative mode.  The change in current
               in the electroreceptors was calculated to about 0.0 003 44a for 1 ms pulses
               at a frequency of 300 cps.

                                1 6
            0                   > 0
                  @-m5s                  1-d 800
                                            Ms
                  Torpedo and Astroscopus  Raia
            +                     +
            0                   > 0
                      3                   2 resp.
                     Ms                     Ms
                 Electrophorus        Eigenma2nri,@a and Sternopygus
            0                   > 0
                      3                     5
                      Ms                    Ms
               Gymnotus (other tha.-. Electrophorus) Gnathonemus
            0                     0
                                             z
                      5                  d   2
                      Ms                 I- rn s
                   NIormyrus           3  Malaptei,urus
          Fig@ 10. Pulse shape and pulse duration of the discharges of some species
                of electric and magnetic sensitive fish. (After H. Grundfest, 1952)

                                                    17
                              100 Ms
                  Fig. ii.  Cross communication between two electric eels in two separate
                            aquaria; optical galvanometer recorder, dc to 10  kc  frequency
                            range, speed 76 mm per second.
                       Gnathonemus Petersii (Figs. 12, 13), an African electric Mormyrid,
                  uti2lizes a pulse position plus pulse amplitude modulation.  The slope of the
                  pulse is less than 50 4sec, and the entire pulse duration is 250 FLsec.
                        Sternarchus Albifrons (Figs. 14, 15, 16), a  South  American  Ster-
                  narchid, utilizes a permuted phase plus 'an amplitude  modulation  coding
                   system.
                         Electrophorus Electricus utilizes a very complicated coding method
  5                 in conjunct-ion with a modulation system with three degrees of  freedom.
                         It was verified that the fish can decode the electric signals emitted by
                   other fish of the same species.  The experiment proving this fact was
                   reported at the 1964 Rochester Conference on Data Acquisition and Processing
                                            9
                    in -Biology and Medicine.

                                                      18
                      By studying the types of coding used by fishes for perhaps twenty or
                thirty million years, we can once more observe that evolution has solved
                biochemical, electrical, and mechanical problems of energy transformation
                by always finding the way to utilize minimum energy combined with excel-
                lent efficiency.  In the case reported on here, evolution f2ound the way to
                extract signals from noise with little power utilization.  The study of the
                natural phenomena and of living organisms still can provide the scientist
                with new clues and means to further the general progress of science.
                                             Acknowledgement
                      I wish to express my appreciation for the support offered by the Air
                Force Office of Scientific Research, Information Syste2m Directorate; the
                Office of Naval Research, Biology Branch; and General Dynamics/Electronics.
                In particular I wish to thank Dr. H. C. Nedderman, Director of Research
                for GD/E, for his managerial assistance.  Mr. Bernardini was responsible
                for the excellent microsurgery required to dissect the Pacinian Corpuscle,
                the electric organs of electric fishes, and their brains.  Mr. R. Zinsmeister
                set u0p the electric equipment and skillfully recorded the electrical activity
                of electric fishes and that of the skin sensory receptors.  Finally I would
                like to thank Mr. R. Doughty for his help in editing this article.

                                                    19
                                     Fig. 12.  Gnathonemus Petersii
                                               (African electric fish).
                       Fig. 13.  Electrical signals emitted by Gnathonemus Petersii.
                                                   rO                      0

                                                     20
                                                        000-1
                                  Fig. 14.  Sternarchus Albifrons
                                            (South American electric fish).
                        MUMML
                        Fig. 15.  Electrical signals emitted by Sternarct-lus Albifrons.
  4                                Scales: vertical, 2 mv/div; horizontal, I ms/div.

                   Recording made with two stainless steel electrodes, 7 inches long, placed in the water tank.
                   Recorder: Midwestern Optical Recorder.
                   Amplifiers: (1) Tektronix and (2) specially constructed units.
                   Date of recording: 2 February 1963         Time: 2:00 PM           Recorder speed: 60 ips
                   Voltage at electrode: 1 M'v (equals 1. 6-inch deflection on recording paper).      i I
                   Voltage at output of second amplifier: 1. 1 v (equals 1-inch deflection on recording paper).
                             Fig. 16.  Recording of the electrical activity of Sternarchus Albifrons.

                                                  22
                                           BIBLIOGRAPHY
                    1. Goldstein, M. H.   Jr., "A Statistical Model for Interpreting
                       Neuroelectric Responses, " Information and Control, 3,
                       pp. 1-17 (1960).
                    2.  Rosenblith, W. A  editor, "Sensory Communication, " MIT
                        Press and John Wiley and Sons, Inc., p. 196 (12961)..
                    3.  Agalides, E., "The Mathematical Model of the Neuron,
                        Rochester Conference on Data Acquisition and Data Processing
                        in Medicine and Biology, Pergamon Press 1962.
                     4. Adolph, A. R., "Sensory Neurology and Analog" Technical
                        Document LMSD 49752, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. (June 1959).
                     5. Wiener, N., "Cybernetics, " or "Control and Comm2unication
                         in the Animal and the Machine, " MIT Press and John Wiley
                         and Sons, Inc., Chapt. 10 (1961).
                     6.  Brazier, M.A. B..l " Long-persisting Electrical Traces in the
                         Brain of Man and Their Possible Relationship to Higher
                         Nervous Activity, " Moscow Symposium on Higher Nervous
                         Sensitivity, 1960.
                      72. Agalides, E., "The Effect of Acoustical Waves on the Pacinian
                         Corpuscle, " Transaction of the New York Academy of Sciences,
                          Vol.  , No.    April 1964.
                      8.  Lissman, H. W. and K. E. Machin, "The Mechanism of Object
                          Location in Gymnarchus Niloticus and similar Fishes,
                          J. Ex-per. Biology, 15, 451 (1958).

                                        23
           Agalides,
                          J. Bernardini, and R,
                                                  Zirlsrneister, if Infor
           rnation Processing by Electric Fislies "
                                                 .,  Proceedings Of the
           1964 Rochester Conference oil Data Acquis  ition and Proce:§sing
          in ATedicizie and Biology, ed., by 1,@. Elislei n, in press:
          Pelga,o,l Press, London and New York.

