                                                          TIltS DO(-,UMFNT CONTAINS
                                                          __ILPAGES. COPY NO.
                                                          OF  -R'   COPII!-,S.
                                         ELEC'I'RIC CURRENT
                                                 AS AN
                             AcE,4,r FOR ?RRSONNEL INCAPACITATION
                                      -______@lrepared  by:
                                            22 Octobcr 1971

                                is report has been prepared by
                              Th
                              as a part of a Government Contract,   @he views expressed
                              are those of            personnel and not necessarily those
                              of the United SLates Government.

                                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                                pa
                     Prf-ttocol 91.,itemc,.nt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  i
                     Li,st >f Figures and Tibles   . . . . . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .  .
                     Problem    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2 . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
                     Discussicn    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
                         1,  P.:)tential Applications .  .  . .  . .  .  .. . . . .  .  .  .
                         11. P:iysical Variables of Electric Current    . . . . . .  .  .  .      3
                        Ill. P--iysiological Considerations    .  .  .  . . .  .  .
                             A.  Effects of Electrical Curren2t on Hurr-ans     . . . .  .  .      5
                             F, -The Human Body as an Electrical Conductor       . . .  .  .    10
                             C.  Skin Resistance  . . . . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    11
                             D.  Burns and Other Thermal Injuries      . . . . .  .  .  .  .    12
                             E.  Pulsed Current      . .  .  . I . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .    13
                      2       F.  Overcoming   Skin    Resistance . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .    14
                             G.  Path of Current Flow Through    the Body   . . . .  .  .  .    is
                             I-f. Physiological Conclusions    . .  . .  . .  .  . .  .  .  . . .17
                        IV. Other System Factors    . . . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    20
                         V. Equipment State of the Art   . . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .  .    23
                       5 VI. Recor):imendations  . . . . . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    25
                     References   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    27

                                              LIST OF FIGURES
                  Figure I     Approxirnate Thrcsliold of I-leart F'.brillation
                                                                I
                                 Ilazard for Single 13rief Current Surges
                                 (AC or DC)  . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . .      9
                 rigu-re 2    Diagrarn of 2Body Area Cornbinations for Current
                                 FtOw Througli Chest   . . . . . . . . . . . . .      17
                                              LIST OF TABLES
                 Table I      Definition of Basic Electricity Terms  . . . . . .      3
                 Table 11     Sensation.and Effects on Heart and Respiratory
                                 Muscles of Currents Lasting I to 30
                                 Seconds    . . . 1.   . . . . . . . .   .             8

                                               ELECTRTC CTJRRENT
                                                        AS AN
                                 AGENT FOR PERSONNEL FNCAPACITATION
                                                      PROBLEM
                   To evaluate, especially frorn the pi-iysiologic point of view, electric  current
                   as an agent for personnel incapacitation.
                              2                       DISCUSSION
                                     1.  Poteritial Applications for Incla@@@
                   Electric current possesses  a  number  of  possible  advantages  when  compared,
                  .to other proposed agents for personnel incapacitation.  Controlled electric
                   shock offers, not necessarily simultaneously, the following possibilities.
                       .Droad spectrum of  2incapacitation:  annoyance,  fear,  intimidation,  pain,
                   muscle spasm, mincr burns, paralysis, suffocaticn, unconsciousness,
                   severe burns, death.
                       Relative predictabilit)r of physiologic effect.: reliable relationship be-
                   Lween dose and responses.
                       C-ontro'-Iability- of dose and on/off fimes.
                       Directivity: with respect to person to be inca2pacitated and bo@ly part(s)
                   to be affected.
                       Effecti,.,en(-ss on a wide range of subjq_cts.: re,ardless of  determination
                   or level of consciousness.
                       Rapic'iity of inca]2acitation: onset of action witliin a second.
                       Rapi(lity of recov=.-  only a few seconds for the milder effects.
                       Safety.   f2or b@tli the operator and t-he subject,*if de-5ired.
                     Througliout tt.s r,@port, stibjects irL- i.@,stimerl lo be lic,,ilthy, .1('Itllt 11LIrnanS
                     in tl-se 45 to 90 kilogram weight range.

                       Covertne-ss: quiet -tnci t;nt)l)triigive, cLn be clirnotifl.-Igerl.
                  Aside from tcclinir,,i] detiiis of the delivery system, tl-t(@ oiil,,r I)ro.-Icl limita-
                  tions to use of electric current as an i-.icapacita2tion agent liave to do  with
                  the number of stii)jects and the duration of incapicitr--tion,  It is diffictilt to
                  conceive of realistic circumstances th,-Lt would perrnit a safe and  ti-niforrn
                  dose to be administered to a n@imber of subjects at one time, altbotigh current
                  would be as effective for the entire group as it is f2or an individual.  In this
                  report, current is coi-tsidered as an incapacitating agentf for individuals only.
                  Elec'.ric ciirrent can be quite safe for periods of incapacitation of a few
                  seconds only) hazards become much greater if current is used to ry)aintain
                  incapacitation for a minute or  longer,  unless  special  techniques  and  pre-
                  c2auti.ons are used.
                  W'ithin these limitations, current could be used  as  an  incapacititing  agent
                  under virtually any circurnstanc,@s.  Power can be su-pplied from permanent
                  supply lines, temporary generators and lines, or portable supplies (includ-
                  ing pocket-sized battery packs in some cases).  Delivery systems might be'
                  p4@,,rmanent in5tallations, tem2porary traps, hand-held instruments or long-
                  range project--le devices.  Automatic controls would suffice for systems
                  designed for brief incapacitations, but  systems  main-.a,'ning  incapacitation
                  for rnore than a. few seconds should be controll-ad by an operator who has
                  some training in the methods of safeguarding the hea'th of the subject.

                                            II.  Pliasicti  Variibles  of  1--lectric  Ctirr(,nt
                        The performtnce ind suitibility of electric shocir for persoi-inet inc,,ip;icita-
                        tion may be affected by several variables which characterize the incapaci-
                        t,iting current.  The more important electrical 2parameters are voltige,
                        current, power (or energy) and frequency.  For familiarity, these and
                        other ter-ns used in  this  stud),  are  briefly  defined  in  Table  1.
                                                                TABLE I
                                          DEFINITION Or 13ASIC ;'LECTRICITY TF'-'@@AS
                        Characteristic                     Brief Defiriit,oii                bymbot      Unit
                        Voltage                      E,:Iectrical  pressure  or   the        E           volt
                                                     electromotive force tending
                                                     to move electrons, potential
                        Current                      Volume of electron flow                 I           arnperp
                        Direct Current  2             Current  that  does   not   vary        DC          a-rnpe re
                                                     in direction or magnitude
                                                     with time
                        Alternating Current          Current that has continuous             AC          arnpere
                                                     sinusoidal variation in direc-
                                                     tion and magnitude xvith time
2                        Frequenc-,r                  Rate  of  alteration  of  an  AC        f           I-Te rtz
                                                     current                                       (cyc te s / sec)
                        Resistance                   Opposition to the flow o--' di-         R           ohm
                                                     -rect or atterilating current
               2         Impedance                    Opposition to the flow oi               z           ohm
                                                     alternating current
                        Pulsed Current               Current that flows inter-
                                                     mittantly, but repe@tedly
                        Energy                       Capacity to do work                                 jokile
                        Power    4                    Rate  of  delivery  of   energy,        p           watt
                                                     the product of voltage and
                                                     current

                   Electric cii-rrc-nts are most often supplicci from b,-Lttel-ics (direct clir -C-.nt) or
                   from rc)titing F-ener-itors (either altc!T-niting or dirc-ct ctirrer.1). The ctir-
                   rent is tistially cai-ried from one locale to ,inother ley low r(,,si.9tince concluc-
                   tors, s!Lich as noi-i-fc-rrotis metils, or by ionizc,.cl liqtiicl.,-, or gases. and is
                   prcventeci f-orn leaving the desireci path by high resist@tnce inskilators,   Tllc
                   application -)f ctirrent or volttge to 1),;iqic elc-c-tric-LI devici--s, inc-.Ititling
                   resistors, coils, and capacitors, permits a wide range of ftii-ictions to be
                   performed by electricity,    These basic electrical 4@evicc-s cotipled with rnore
                   cornpticated devices, such as vacuurn tubes and transistors, form the work-
                   ing components of all electrical and elect-ronic sys@e2ms which generate,
                   tr,-tnstiiit, store, amplify, modiiiate or otherwise ck)ntrol electric-, ti@rr(,nt.
                   PkirposefuL control of the variables of electricity can be accomplished
                   through the use of these basic devices. For exarnl:ple, a  coil  or  incltictor
                   ,.Vill tend to conduct direct current and lo,.v frequencv alternating citrrent,
                   while irnpe@ing high frequency alternating current.  Similarly, a capacitor
                   or condenser acts as  a  conductor  for  high  frequency  alternating  current,
                   but impedes direct current and low frequency alter-nating current,
                   The spectrum of physical and physiological effects produced by the varia-
                   tions of volca-e, current and frequency is probably familiar to2 many read-
                   ers: the tingle of a mild electric shock of low amperage, the appearance
                   of a high volt,,ige arc discharge, the accidental bur-i from I 10 volt, 60-1-Tertz
                   "house current" or the painful shocl@;. from the high vol-,@age of an automobile
                   ignition system-
                   In terms of incapacitation and biological effects on living sy8stems, ctirrent
                   not voltage - is the most important variable of electricity.  The frequency
                   of the ckirrent may also be a factor in deterr@inirig the dcl(-teriotis effects of
                   electric current, especially with regard to the sensit-ivity of the hklman
                   heart.
                                                             4-

                                        III.  Pli -.;if)lo icit on.@id@erati(Dns
                 A.   Effects of Electrical Ciirrent on  I-Itimans
                 With the exception of inconsequential effects such as the feel'Ing of 'hair.-
                 standing-on-end, high voltages without current flow have no knowii effect
                 on human 2welt-being or performance,  Polarity of a dir@ct current or
                 brief di@charge rnakf-s no apparent difference with regard to the incapaci-
                 ta.ting effects of flowing current.
                 As it relates to the incapacitation problem, electric  =urren@,  has  only  three
                 significant e-EfeLts on human tissues:
                      1.  Dep,31arization, of nerve and mus2cle tissue, @-ausing  the  "firing"  of
                 nerve or brain cells and coritraction of muscle fibers.  Depolarization
                 causes the subjective ti,-igle, involuntary muscular contractions and several
                 other side-eff2cts of an electric shock.
                     2.   Channe in sensitivity of cei-tain irritable tissues, such as increas@d
                 heart irritability and s,.tnsjl&-i 2it-y to fibrillation. t Fib-illa'@ion is an uncoord-
                 inated "bag-of-worms" contractile activity of the heart, and is a major
                 threat to life which may ensue when moderate electrical currents pass
                 through the heart.  Death can follow because a fibrillating @zart c@,-nnot
                 pu,mp blood.
                     3.   Heating, to the pl@int of coagulation and burniz2,g if ctirrent flow is
                 large enotigli or concentrated in a  small  atea,
                 All three of the above effects  could  contribute'to the pain of a  severe  shock,
                 although a laz- e part rnav be pain due to  mlisc       M.
                                                                  le spas
                   Unless otherwise attributed, the material presente-J in  this  section  is  de-
              3   rived from Re-'erence 1, which also provides a biblicigrapliy of the basic
                 publications on the physiologic effects of electric cui-rent.
                 t In this report, fibrillation rneans ventricular fibrillation,
                                                          5-,

                    Detiilc-d effic@cts c,-iri bc prcdictcci if the @LT-np(, rage, rotit(- i-lirokigl,. tli,4, 1.)Ociy.
                    dliration of current flo,@v anr3 freqtiency of t]-ie power supply are known.        De-
                    liberate exectition in an el(-2ctric chiir is an extreme examplc- in which
                    approxirrately 10 @Lmperes  of  50  to  60  Hert7,  current  are  passed  from  'head
                    to both feet for longer than  a  minute.  Such  a  lethal  curr(-nt  citises  imnied-
                    i,ite  tinconsciousness,  immediate  and  continuot:ts  Ilt-6t@xnic"  contriction  of
                    all  rnajor  rntiscles  including  the  heart,  thereby  arresting  respiration  and.
                    all  useful  heart  activity,  and  severe  heating  effects  most  pronounced  where
                    the .,D-@@cial electrodes  make  contact  with  the  ski-,i.  The  colloquial  phrase
                    "frying in the chairl@ seems apt.
                    A less drastic but equally  dramatic  ,  -,a  of  electric  current  is  in  electro-
     2               convulsive  therapy  or  "shock  treatment"  for  mentLI  illness.  In   this   case,
                    50 to 60 ho--rtz currents on  the  order  of  I  ampere  &re  passed  from  one  side
                                                                              z ,
                    of the head to the other for one-half second or less.         @he patient  irnriiedi-
                    atei)r  loses  consciousness  and  ha2s  a  generalized  convulsion  that  appears  to
                    last  longer  than  the  duration  of  current  application.  The   patient   usually
                    regains cor-sciousness  'Within  a  few  minutes  and  may  be  phys-ically  able  to
                    walk  promptly.  There  is  likely  to  be   residual   muscular   soreness   and   a
                    confusional state may  persist  for  any  pz@riod  of  time  from  seccnds  to  days.
2                    The patient retains perrnanert amnesia for the time of the shock and usually
                    makes  no  serious  objection  to   repeat   treatments,   Therapy   personnel   tale
                    great  care  to  make  large-area,  low-resistance  ele,7.trical  contact   on   both
                    sides of the  head  to  prevent  current  burns  on  the  Facitnt's  scalp.  It  must
                    be  emphasized  that  cur-ent  flow2,  and  hence  all  direct  effect,  of   electro-
                    convulsive therapy, is  confined  to  the  head.  Thu@  depolarizing  action  of  the
                    current  on  the  brain  causes  convulsive  stimuli  to  flow  out  to  the  muscles
                    through  the  normal  channels  of  the  nervous  system;  there  is  no  significant
                    current flo,.v through the  trunk  or  extremities  althotigh  they  6move  violently.
                    Only organs in the pati-k  of  the  current  flow  can  be  affected  directly.  This
                    is wh-@ there is  no  risk  of  direct  electrical  interference  with  betrt  action
                    during properly conducted electro-convulsive therapy.

                    (,-iirrents passing t,,.Totigh the torso can cakise spas:ic -,2arilysi5 of I:Iic.-
                    respiratory, baclz and abdominal rnuscl(,,s.  Contin--ious pir,-Llysis of Llie
                    re-qpiratory mtiscles for several mintitc@s cin lead -a stiffocition  rei,,ardl@2-ss
                    of other consequences.  The most imr-nediate and potentially lethal threat
                    posed by a ::tirrent passirg through  the  chest,  however,  is  electricl]  inter-
                    tercnce wit-i heart activity.  Table 11 outlines the hizards of currents xppl'cd
                    c.-cternally to tile chest for several seconds.
                    Inspect2ion of Table 11 reveals several key points.  For a given curr(,nt level
                    in the 0 to 3, 000 milliampere range, alternating current has greater physio-
                    logic effect and is more ha@.ardous than  direct  current.  Fibrillatic)ii  of  the
                    heart is rarely caused by direct current regardless ul arnperage-.  Vent-
                    ricular fibrillation is almost always fatal unles2s given special treatment
                    within minutes, but hearts that have bfen completely paralyzed for short
                    periods usually resume normal activity spontaneously after the current
                    stops.  This difference accounts for the apparent Faradox in the dose-
                    response  relationships  shown  for  alternating  currents:  other  factors   being
                    equal, a current greater than 3 amperes is less litzely to b2e imrnediately
                    fatal than currents in the 80 milliarr@pere to 3 ampere range.  It must be
                    ernphas-'-zed that the approximations indicated by T3Lble :11 are  valid  only  for
                    current applied externally acros,,z the chest  and  for  the  indicated  durations.
                    The voltage required to produce a given current, cf course, is highly depel-
       2             dent on the nature of the electrodes, skin resistance, and olher factors.
                    The fibrillation threshold rises for  current  durations  sliorter  than  one  sec-
                    ond, at least for non-repetitive pulses of curre,,,it.  Figure 1 indicat,?.s an
                    approxii-nate "worst case  hrc-shotd for fibrillation hazard in terms of tile
                    current-tirrge factor for brief ex2posures to any type of current, including
                    60 Hz AC and capacitor discharges.  For shocks lasting less than one second,
                    the thresho'-d shown by Figure I is for constant enc-rgy ptilses of 1. 6 joule
                       The stardard inethod of "closed" defibrillation -,s to apply abotit 300 joules
                    of electrical energy in 0. 2 seconds yr less through large electrodes held firn0-i-
                    ly on the skin of the anterior cle3L.    One joule is <)ne watt-secoiid.
                                                               7-

                                                                           TA13    LE    11
                               Sr--iNSATION AND EFFECTS ON 14FART ANT) RRSPTI@ATORY MTTSCI,E@
                                                 Or CURRENTS               LASTING I TO 30 SECONDS
                                                           (THRESliOLDS APPROXIMATE)
                           Current        2         Sensation                          Heart                  R@s iratory Muscles
                             (rna)             ACt              DC            ACT            DC              A                       DC
                           0-1                none         none          none             none              none             norie
                           1-5                tingle       none          none             none              none             none
                           5- 25              pain         tingle        none             none              sligh@           none
                                                                                                            contraction
                           Zs-ao              pain         pain          ncfc             none              P&ralysii        Slight
            2                                                                                                                 contraction
                           80-300             p-in         pain          fibrillation     none              paralysis        paralysis
                           300-3,000          pain         pain          fibrillation     paralys--.s       paralysis        paralysis
                           over 3, 000        pain,        ptin,         paralysis        paralys@.a        paralysis        paralysis
                                              burns        burns
                             For  curren,s  applied  externally  to  the  chest;  currents  smaller  than  0.   I   miltiarni:,tr?,   can
                             cause fibrillation  if  applied  directly  tc)  the  heart.  3
                             IO- 1,  000  He0rtz
                             .-xpoeuve  longer  than   30   seconds   may   cause   fibrillation

                                                                               CURRENT
                                                                               ioo
                        ....... . . .
                                                                                    VI
                             j@;
                                             FIBRILLAT.  A4AHO
                                                        2                       10
                                                                 14
                                                                                    $4
                                          IVELY SAFF:
                                  !II RE!Lr                                     iuu
                                                                                lo
                                71
                     2      10      100       1      10     .100      1       10
                         rnicxoseconds       I     rnilliseconds      5econds
                                        DURATION OF CURRENT
                                   (Continuous, Non-Repetitive Flow)
               Figtire 1.  Approxii-nate Threshold of I-leart Fibrillation Hazard for
                           Eingle, Brief Current Surges (AC or DC).i

                      Adak
                   each.  Scvcrti atitharities suggest that 1-iazard threshold might well be at
                   ent-rgy levels an order of magnitude higher Li-lan that shown; thus the thres-
                   hold shown I)y r,'igiire I may be quite conservitive-I                   -
                   Currents of stiffir-ient magnitude will cause pain2ful involuntary contraction
                   of muscles as the currents pass through an extrem.ity.  The motion made
                   by the extremity as the muscles contract will depend upon. (1) the rnuscle
                   groups stirnulated, and (Z) the relative Strengths of contraction of the
                   various muscle groups.  A person "thrown" or "knocked down" by electric
                   shock has been moved by his own muscle cont2ract--ons rather than any
                   direct T)ropulsive effect of the current.  Relatively weak movements caused
                   by sinalkl currents can be overcome by voluntary muscle control, especially
                   in large po-.verful people.  A "no-let-go" current thresho'd can be determi-
                   ned by measuring progressively larger currents f'-owing through a person's
                2   arm frorn an electrode grasped in his hand, up to the current at which he
                   can no longer voluntarily release the electrode with the current flowing.
                   The no-let- go threshold for adults is in the 6 to 3C rnilliampere range for
                   60 Hz AC.  Current values will be similar for other AC frequencies in the
                   10 to 1, 000 Hz range, but DC currents would have to be about five times ag
                2   large for s--milar effect.1
                   B.  The Human Body as an Electrical Conductor
                   From the standpoint of electrical shock, th-- normal human body can be con-
                   sidered as a bony framework encased in a protein get with some lipids, all
                   of which is permeated with an aqueous salt soltitio-,i and encased in a water-
                   proof skin.  The electrical resistance of organs generally varie2s inversely
                   with water content.  Tissiies such as blood and muscle display resistances
                   in the order of 1, 000 ohms per cubic centimeter while dense bone, fat and
                   nervous tissues have resistances several times hicyher.  Whole body resis-
                   tance, exclusive of skin, is on the order of ZOO- 1, -DOO ohms.  TI-ie trunk has'
                   a lower resistance than the extremities 9with their smaller cross section
                   and high proportion of bone.  Current inside the bc-dy appears to spread in a
                                                          to-

                 fairly uniforrn manner through tl-ie available volume between the point of
                 entrance and the point of exit rat)-ler than being noticeably conc(-ntrated
                 along any sp-2cial low-reSiStATice pith.
                 The sicin usually presents the rnajor resistive barrier to electric ctirrent
                 flow.  Most Df the skin resistance is in the opider,-nis, the dry, horny outer
                 Layer withotit blood vessels.  Thickness of the epidermis, and hence the
                 resistance of the skin, may vary widely between different parts of the body,
                 Thin skin behind the knee or in the axilla may offer less than a thousand
                 ohms resistance, especially if moist.  At the other extreme, a tllick, dry
                 callous may offer resistance approaching a rnill-lon :)hrns.  Skin that is rela-
                 tivety moist, such as on the palms, soles or axi',Iae, will be more conduc-
                 tive than drier skin of the same thickness elsewhere on the body. 1 During
                 sound sleep, all skin resistance rises greatly.4
                 C.  Skin Resistance
                                                                                         1
                 The major factors in electrode-to-bod2y resistance through the skin are:
                     1.  Thickness and intrinsic moisture of the skin, as noted above.
                 Range: about 1, 000 - 1, 000, 000 ohms (dry contact).
                     2.  "Wet" or dry contact.  Presence or absence of an electrolyte solu-
                 tion providing a conductive pathway between electrode and skin.  "Wet"
                 contact can be proveded by special preparati2ons suc@'i as electrode paste or
                 fluids such as sweat, blood, saline solution or even tapwater.  Conversion
                 from a dry contact to a "wet" one usually drops the :,esistance one or two
                 orders of maffnitude.
                     3.  Intact or damaged skin.  Any thinnii-g, scratching or penetration
                 of the epidcrmis can drastically reduce skin resistance.  In addtion to any
      7           reduction due to a wet contact, painless, gentle sandpapering of the skin
                 can also redtice the resistance one or two orders of magnitude.  Even a
                 tiny penetrating burn, such as that caused by a small area of contict witl-i
                 high voltage, will cause a near-instantaneous drop in skin resistance to a

                 few Iiiindrcd ohms or less.
                      4.   Area of contact.  Otl-Ler factors being cqtial, resistance is inversely
                 proportional :o the area of contact.  A large area of Liniforn-I dry contact is
                 difficult to ac-hieve in practice.  Significant and predictable redtiction in
                 rcsist.ince by lirge area contact is ordinarily achie2ved  only  with  wet  con-
                 tact such as immersion of a bod-,r part or wet clothin-,Y.
                      5.  Pressure of contact.  Increased pressure on a dry contact with
                 intact slizin can reduce resistance, but the effect is usually not  pronotinced
                 enough to cause dry electrode-to-skin resistances lower than 10, 000 ohms
                 untit the contact pressure exce2eds 10 kilograms per square centimeter.
                     6.   Frequency of the electric power.  Skin in-ipedence, or total tenden-
                 cy to obstruct the flow of electric current, is inversely proportional to
                 increases in the frcciuenc-)r of the applied electric power.  The relationship
                 ii not sufficient to lower the effective skin impedance two orders of magni-
                 tude until the power supply 2frequency  approaches  100  kHz.  This  repo--t  is
                 not concerned with such radio frequency currents because "skin effect" .
                 keeps most of the current o-i the body surface where it is  ineffective  as  an
                 incapacitating agent.
                     7.   Skin :zovering.  Dry hair and most dry cloth-.ng can increase the
                 electrode-to-body resistance by millions of ohms.
                 D.  B2urns and Other Therni@ I@nu@jLies
                 The beating effects of electric current are dependent upon the amount of
                 electrical ene.-gy being dissipated per unit time in a given volume of con-
                 ductor.  About four joules of eiectrical energy must be dissipated in a gram
                 of water in order to beat the water one  degree  centigrade.  In  general,  the
                 tempe-rature rise of tissue being heated 2by electric current varies:
                     1)  directly with the square of the current
                     2)  directly with the resistance of the tissue
                     3)  directly with the time of current flow
                    4)   inversely with the effective volurne or cross-section of the conductor
                                                          12-

                 Consider,-ition of tl)csc f,'Icts Ic,"fls to the conclusion th,-Lt the highest temper-
                 attire rises in most cases of electrical sliocie will occur in the skin at one or
                 both points of electrical contact -,vith the body.  For significant current flnws,
                 skin burns of some degree will rel-Liain a hazarci unless spe2cial precautiolis
                 are taken to avoid high skin r@sistance and small effective cross-sections
                 of electrical contact with the sirin.
                 Conversely, the large effective cross-,,ection and lo-.v resistanci-. of the body
                 beneath the skin means that n-iany amperes of current flowing for prolong-
                 ed periods would usually be required to "cook" organs other than the ski2n.
                 An electric arc in air at one atmosphere has a temperature of 2500' to
                 3000' C and can cause local heat effects other than those due to current
                 passing through skin resistance.
                 E.  Pulsed Current
                 Repeated brief pulses would seem to offer several decided advantages as a
                 form of delivering electrical energy for incapacitatiz)n purposes.  At a
                 pulse 2repetit-'-on rate of one per second or faster, pulsed currents should
                 be able to cause as much pain, paralysis and incoorjination as continuous
                 current, per,iaps even rnoi,e than continuous direct current.  Very brief
                 pulses and a sr-nail duty cycle would mean low average power levels, resul-
                 ting in: (1) reduced burn hazard to the subject; and (Z) reduced drain on
                 the power supply 2system.  For example, a one ampere pulse lasting one
                 millisecond (0. Z5 joule of energy, assuming internal body resistance of
                 250 ohms) cculd be repeated at 10 pulses per second with a time-average
                 power of oniv 2. 5 watts, one hundred times less than a continuous current
                 of one ampere.  If such pulses passed throug@% major portions of a man's
                 body, they should be 5completely incapacitating with onlv minor burn hazard
                 and low drain on the power supply.  Figure 1 might be misconstrued to
                 suggest that such a pulsed current is known to be safe as fkr as the 'heart
                 is concerned.  It must be emphasized that the figure relates to a single
                                                         13-

                                                                                    AgMk
                        w
                     non- re petitive pkltse only, a,d that ha7ard thre,,ho"6s
                                                                                              pulses
                     1-c-i-nain to be determined.
                     Worki2ng will-i data from studies LiSing I-iurnans and expe-rirriental anirnals,
                     Zoll and cc-woriers found that: (1) 3 millisecond pulses of abokit 100 rnil-
                     liamperes (energy 0. 06 joule and less) applied across the @--host would
                     trigger a 1-ieartbeat; and (2) pulses repeated 8 to Z) t2imes  per  second   for
                     periods on the order of a minute could cause fibrillation in some cases.      5
                     Thus a one ampere pulse lasting one millisecond lenergy 0. 25 joule) would
                     be likely to trigger a heartbeat each time the pulse passed through the
                     chest, and a fibrillation hazard could  exist  in  normal  hearts  subjected  to
                     rapid rates of such "external heart pacing" for 2prolonged periods.  From
                     the information presented by Zoll et at, there would appear to be little
                     danger of fibrillation or low cardiac output if the external pacing -is @arried
                     out aL a rate within the normal heartbeat range.      Thus a repetition rate of
                     about two pulses per second might prove to be well tolerated for prolonged
                     periods, at least as far as direct cardiovascular hazard is concerne2d.
                     Incapacita--"Lng pulses passing through the chest at a rate  of  about  two  per
                     second are likely to interfere seriously with breathing, and might prevent
                     loud vocalization, along, with a-ay otl-ier coordinated action.  If   breathing
                     were stopped by the pulses, the subject could eventually suffocate,
                     The safety of repeated brief pulses for incapacitati2on p6rposes has not been
                     proved by the                                     Ireport dated 25 Sune 1971.
                     The longert reported test period was four seconds and no evidence is pre-
                     sented with regard to the subjects' cardiac or respiratory stattis durina the
                     test period, the t-Lme required for functiona'i recovery after delivery of the
                     last pulse, and the th3resholds for "no-let-gol   I status and skin burns.
                     F.   Overco@@@@@
                     As previously noted, hum,-in skin and hair often present a trajor resistive
                                                                14-

                     barrier to delivery of electric current for incapacitation purposes. 1%4cthods
                     of overconniiig the skin resistince problem may be summarized as follows:
                        Avoid tl-ie slzin. ?vlale cox)t,-Lct with moist mucosal surf,-Lces such as
                     mouth and rectum.
                                  ],in.  Make conta(,@t with sl;.in sui-faces that are already wet.
                        u S@e Wt@5 I'@ @.
                     or deliberately'moisten the eloctrode pi-,tcernent sitals.
                        Use damac:ed sl<in.  Make wet contact with skin previously or deliber-
                     ately scratched or abraded, as with an abrasive electrode paste.
                      2  Penetrat                       :rodes.  Make direct contact with struc-
                     tures beneath the epidermis by means of electrodes in such forms as
                     needles, splinters, burrs and slivers.
                        Use 1--iah voitage.  Sufficiently high voltages will force any required
                     current tl--rough the skin regardless of high skin resistance.  Iiigh voltage
                     cannot be considered a simple all-2purposed solution to the skin resistance
                     problem because high voltage is likely to cause extremely rapid changes in
                     skin characteristics.  A voltage- high enough to force an incapacitating cur-
                     rent through two high resistance dry skin contacts may well cause small
                     burns that result in a drastic fall in skin resistance; if 'high volt-,age-. is main-
                     tained in -he face of rapidly declining res2istance, an enormous and hazard-.
                     ou.9 current flow develops.  Variot,-s electrical techniques are available to
                     limit current flow in such cases.  Use of high voltages also requires that
                     special precautions be taken to avoid short circuits that bypass the slib-
                     ject's body.
                     G.  Path of Current Flow Through the B.qdy
                     The complete loop of curre8nt flow must be considered in every case of
                     electric shock, and any changes taking place  during the shocl-,ing process
                     must be borne in mind.  The locations of effective current entry and exit
                     from the body are all important with regard to F-hysiologic effect, consid-
                     ering that current has direct effects on only those organs through which it
                     flows.

                         T%%,o .2lectrodp-s closely sp@xccd.  Current entry and exit points within
                    a fcw cencimctcrs of each other on the body surface can cikise local pain,
                    n-itiscle spasm tnd btirns only.  Thi- only 3ignific.!int excet)t-ion would be
                    electrodes on the front of the chest where pa2rt of the current could flow
                    through the heart. Closely spaced electrodes colild be  used  to  cause  limited
                    incapacitation by pain and, if properly used, could be quite safe.
                         Two electrodes widelv spaced.  Widely 'spaced electrodes on the body
                    siirface offer a great variety of possible physiologic consequences, depend-
                    ing on ful' details of the rnethod used.  In all2 cases, there will be local
                    effects near the electrodes as  noted  above.  Large  currents  passing  between
                    electrodes on opposite sides of the head may have effects  similar  to  electro-
                    coxivulsive therapy, at the risk of severe scalp b,-irns unless the electrodes
                    provide large areas of good contact; similar effe--ts, along with others,
                    might be expected with current flowi2ng from the :op of the head to another
                    electrode at neck levet or lower on the body.  Current flowing only in one
                    extremity can have direct effects ovi that extrqmity only.  There are many
                    possibilities for widely space(! electrodes to cause significant current flow
                    through t@e chest with resultant posribility of interference with  cardiac  and@
                    or respiratory activity.  Figur2e Z illustrat.-s the possibilities of placement
                    of contacts that cause a significant proporti3n of the current to flow through
                    the chest.  Electrode pairs offer such a possibility if they: (1) are on oppo-
                    site sides of the plane AU; (2) are on opposite sides of the plane BC; cc (3)
                    are on the front and back of the chest or .ipper abd@)i.-nen.  Figure 2 shows
                    that the only path from one extremity to another, not threatening chest acti-
                    vities, is from one lower extrernity to another.
                         One electrode and "ground".  This situation must be considered as two
                    electrodes, the second electrode being whatever is considered "ground" in
                    contact with both the subject's body and the other part of the essential  closed
                    2circuit for current.  The siiigle electrode problem rray be ori,- thing if the
                    subject is standiiig barelr>ot in a rice paddy, and entirely differevt if he is
                    standing in diy she -,s on a d-ry wooden floor.  An,,r change in the --Libject's
                    body contact with "ground, 11 such as falling onto or away from llg:-otind, 11
       5             can radically alter the current flow situation.
                                                            - 16-

                   AML
                                                                            Heart
                                                                        U   Umbilicus
                      Figure 2.  I)iagrarn of Body Area Cornbinations for Current
                                       Flow Through Chest.  (See Text)
                  H.  physio
                  It is possible to u4se electrical current as an agent :o cause a whole spectrum
                  of human in-zapacitation from minor distract;on through muscle sp.-Lsm, pain,
                  contortion, minor burn,3, x@espiratory arrest and perhaps vocai paralysis,
                  cardiac arrest, unco-4@sciousnes@, xitli convulsion, severe burns and death.
                                                         17-

                 The approxirnate degree and duration of incapacitation can, within lin-tits.
                 be predetermined by appro-)riate selection of curren: type, amount, dura-
                 tion, and patlt ira tl!e body,  In generzli, electrical tc-cliniq@ies tc-.nd to he
                 tirne-tirnited if safety is a consideration-, prolonged use of electric current
              2   to i-naintiin incapacitation may present grave hazards to the subject in thi-
                 forrn of burn:i, inadequate heart output or inadequate respiration.  On the
                 other hand, a brief "knock-do%vn" incapacitation can be achieved with rela-
                 tive safety by almost any large current flowing for an extremely short
                 period of time (less than a mi.Ilisecond),
                 Several t2echniques can be,used to increase the safet-i factor of current
                 being used to incapacitate for longer than the "knock-down. 11 A current
                 large enotigh to cause extremely painful paralysis of the extrernities pre-
                 sents no danger more serious than burns if t does not pass through the
                 chest.  In this respect, optimum safety with severely incapacitating currents
                 could be achieved with the current flo2wing: (1) from one lower extremity
                 to the other; or (2) from a distal point to a proximal point on the same extre-
                 mity.  Over such paths continuous AC current of rn,)re than Z5 milliamperes
                 or DC currer-t of more than 80 milliamperes should keep at least one extre!-
                 rnity of a man painfully paralyzed for the duration of current flc, ; currents
                 larger t2han an arnpere could cause severe burns, especially if the current
                 flows continuously for many seconds.
                 If the current path is through the chest, the use of direct current will vir-
                 tually obviate the hazard of heart fibrillation although the likelihood of res-
                 piratory and cardiac arrest remains with direct currents in the effective
                 range.  Cardiac arrest causes unconsciousness within a few seconds and
               2  death after severa" minutes.  Complete respiratory arrest usually causes
                 unconsciousness in iess than four minutes and death in about ten minutes.
                 Both kiqds of arrest would be likely with direct currents larger than 300
                 milliampv-res passing through the chest, so incapacitating direct current
                 would usuallv have to be kept in the 80 to 300 rnilliampere range if it is to be
                 used9 for prolonged periods.
                                                         18-

                                                                                       Ask
                         w
                      The safety rn.-Lrgin  for  incapacitating  levels  of  alternating  current  flowing
                      Llirotigh the cliest is ntrrow for periods as short as a few seconcis and
                      tbc!rc is no m@irgin of  safety  if  the  clrrent  flows  for  more  than  30  se2conds.
                      All such shocl-,s should be considered potentially, lethal.
                      C.-Lrefully chosen piitsed currents,  perhaps  brief  surges  of  one  jottle  or  less
                      delivered  once  or  twice  per  second,  may  offer  effective  and  relatively   safe
                      incapacitation when flowing between.Lna two widely zpaced points on the
                      body.  Several  key  questions  regarding   the2   safety   and   effectiveness   remain
                      to  be  answered  by  direct  investigation,  but  indirect  ev@,idence  suggests  that
                      such pulses would  offer  the  following  ad,iantages;  (1)  no  direct  threat  to  aL
                      normal heart for any  duration  of  incapacitation;  (2)  only  minor  ski-.i  burns
                      at worst; and (3) low average2 current requirement for the paver supply.
                      The  facts  remain  to  be  verified,  but  such  pulses  passing  from  any  point  on
                      the upper extremities  or  the  upper  body  to  any  poi-nt  below  the  waist  may
                      well be  ca@-able  of  preventing  respiration  and  effective  speech  in  addition
                      to  causing  conip,ete  imrnobilization  by  muscle  spasm  and  pain.  If  this  is2
                      the case, an operator could be equipped with a system enabling him to:
                      (1) knock P. subject down rapidly; (2) keep the subject incapacitated and          un--
                      able to make an  effective  outcry  for  perhaps  a  minute;  (3)  turn  the  pulses
                      off for long enough to allow the subject  to  take  a  breath  or  two.  (4)  turn  the
                      pulses Lack  on  unti2l  the  subject  becomes  blue  or  passes  out;  and  (5)  repeat
                      steps 3  and  4  for  a  reasotiable  length  of  time.  Pr;Dperly  handled,  the  sub-
                      ject  should  recover  promptly  after  the  pulses  have  been  turned  off  for  sev-
                      eral seconds, and have no permanent ill effects aside from probable small-
                      area skin burns.
                      Electrical  currents  are  not 1 lil<ely  to  cause  the  immediate  coma  and   convul-
                      Sion of cle@-tro-convulsive therapy without: (1) severe burns about the
                      'head or (2) tl-e use of techniques very similar to those used in ECT.
                                                                   ig-
                      4*

                                                IV.  Other System Factors
                                 .5@ Libsvstems
                                      Information presented in the preceding section of this 'report
                      indicates that: (1) one large non-repetitive pulse lasting less than a second.
                      mir,ht be appropriate as a "knockdown" technique; and (Z) longer incapacita-
                2      tion will require continuous power in the I to Z50 watt range, quite likely
                      less than 25 watts, depending upon the technique.  A  large  capacitor,  pre-
                      viously charged from a primary source, could supply the single    brief burst
                      of power.  Systems requiring longer duration power could draw     upon perm-
                      anent supply installations, temporary gercrators, or batteries,   as   appro-
       2               p'riate in terms of power drain and anicipated'duration.  lpower  supply
                      reliability should approach 100% in a properly designed system.  Power
                      conditioning equipment is needed to rriake the re!quired changes, such as
                      voltage step-up, temporary storage,  current  limitation,  and  modifications
                      with respect to timing.  The reliability of power co-iiditioning equipment
                      should also approach 100'7o.
                      Controls,  Except in special circumstances where sorne degree of variability
                      or automaticity of current delivery would be desirable, the current control
                      mechanism probably should be a reliable manual on-off switch.
                      Deliverv Conductors. Properly designed conductors should present few
                      probt2ems in systems where the electrical supp"y  cc,mponents  and  the  elec-
                      trodes have been prepositioned before the arrival of the subject, wl-to is
                      expected to move himself into appropriate contact with the electrodes.
                      Similar,ly, short-rang43 conductors, as for a hand-held device, should be
                      quite rel--able.  A conductor.-propulsion combination suitable for swif2t
                      long-range deployment will require extremely careful design if it is to be
                                                             Zo-

                          AIM6
                       re@iab@e witli regard to open-circiiit and short-ci:-cu;' possibilities tincier  a
                       variety of field conditions.
                       Electrocles.  Electrode design and placement will           to allow for alt the
                       variables to be presented by the siibject and the eivironment in the fi(-Id.
      2                 The subject variables are litrely to include location  in  space..  body  posture,
                       motion before receiving current, motion and posture after receiving cur-
                       rent, clothing, moisture of skin and clothing, nature of surrounding objects,
                       proximity and actions of companions.  Subject variability is likely to deter-
                       mine the path of current flow in the body of a subject wl-,o 2moves himself
                       into contact with previolisly placed electrodes.  Pgain, hand placement
                       should be easy,  but  swift  long-range  placement  of  adequate  electrodes  will
                       r-@quire expert design in order to be reliable under a  variety  of  field  condi-
                       tions.  Electrodes are subject to open-circuit and short-circuit failure
                       modes, in addition to dangers or ineffectiveness2 which might rest-Lit frorn
                       inappropriate current pathways through the body.
                       B.  C)perator Risk
                       Standard electrical safety precautions, built into the system, should be ade-
                       quate for operator safety so long as the operator avoids electrical contact
                       with the electrodes or the subject white current is flowing.     A-he operator
                       colild h2ardle the subject if he; (1) turned off the current; or (Z) wore insula-
                       ting gloves of an appropriate thickness.
                       C.  Covertness
                       Aside from the actions of  the  subject,  electri'cal current system activity
                       should be inapparent to an observer except for the possible faint snapping
                       noise, smell of ozone or burning and dim light o-2 small high-v5oltage arcs.
                       As discussed previously, the subject may or may not be able to scream,
                       shOLIt or signal. 'A severely incapacitatc-d subject is lil@ely to fall down,  and
                       might thr-ash abotit or je@--k kinder some circumstances,
                                                               -zi-

                   D   Cou@termcasures
                   Onl)r limited r-otintermeastires would be available to protect a stil-)jcr-t  from
                   a properly designed electrical incapacitation systerr@.  In  general.  cc,)"inter-
                   measures wculd fall into the fotlowing categories:
                       Avoidance.  Stay away from the electrodes.
                       Minimize 2current flow.  Current penetration of the body can        be  effect-
                   ively reduced by: (1) interposing an insulat-ing layer between the       electrode
                   and the body: or (Z) providing a low resistance short-circuit path     between
                   electrodes so most of the current flow remains outside the body.  Insulating
                   footwear could often be aL reliable countern-ieasure to any systern    using a
         2          single electrode with "ground. 11 Insulating gloves might enable a     subjecl to
                   remove electrodes delivering currents above the "no-let-goll threshold 'if
                   initial electrode placement does not provide a completely incapacitating
                   path oi current flow through the bocly.  Protective clothing could have a low
                   resistance (short-circuiting) outer  tayer  and  a  high  resistanc9e  'insulating)
                   inne r laye r.
                       Interrupt current flow.  Once a'truly incapacitating current flow has
                   been established in the subject's bc,,dy, deliberate irterruption of the current
                   could be accomplished only by the operator or a thiz-d party coming to the
                   aid of the subject.
                                                            -22-

                                             V.   r-clui,3nicnt Stite- of- tl-.c- Art
                                          system is the only electrical incap.-tcitation tinit for
                     which the authors of this report  have  detailed  inf@rrnation.  The
                     concept  may  be  summarized  as  a  self-contained,   hand-carried, battery-
                     powered unit2 designed to project one or two insu.ated delivery wires at
                     high velocity to a subject who may be at ranges up to 100 meters; delivery
                     wire(s) may terminate at electrode(s) that may be bare wire, net, dart,
                     barb, burr, adhesive or some other form; current is passed through the
                     subject in brief 0. 1 to 3 joule pulses at about 30, 000 volts repeated 2 to 220
                     times per second.  Data are presented from test-s involving a small number
                     of experimental animals and human volunteers.  During these tests, inca-
                     pacitation periods were limited -to four seconds or less.
                                                                                        concept
                     In view of the information presented in this repo.-:t,  the
                     appears bas2ically sound provided that a reliable wire delivery and elec-
                     trode emplacement system can be proved satisfactory under field conditions.
                     From the physiological standpoint, safer and more rapid incapacitation
                     might have been achieved with larger energy pulses repeated more slowly
                     than the ten per second indicated in most of the          Itests.  Available
                     test infor-nation is n2ot conclusive with regard to:  (1) incidence of skin burns;
                     (2) respiratory and voc-it status during shocks; (3) whether or not           I
                     personnel knew that they were llp.?--ing" the hearts of th4i subjects; (4) effects
                     of prolonged exposure to the pulses; and (5) results when electrodes are
                     projected to the subjects rather than carefully tap6ed  in  position.
                     Incornplet-e descriptions of other systems for incapacitation by electric cur-
                     rent are also available.  One is a patent application for a pistol that would
                     produce "artificial epilepsy,' by firing a small projectile with tw'o trailing
                     wires, the projectile to be equipped with two forward-facing needle etectrodes
                                                             -23-

                  to penetrate Llic skin of the subject.  The only way for such a device to catise
                    trkic gencrali7,ed convulsion wokild be for the necjlcs to penetrate the
                  sub ect's brain$ Closely spaced electrodes cAn cause only local direct -
                  effects.  E'-sewhere on the body, such a device could cause annoyance, pain
                  and possibly I)tirns before the subject 2removed the projectile.
                  Streams of conductive fluid, such as impure water, have been suggested as
                  alternatives to conventional metallic conducting wixes and electrodes.  Suc'h
                  suggestions have merit so long as practical considerations of raiii,c, time,
                  and open-circuit and short-circuit problems are kept in mind.
                                                         264-

                                               VI.  Recommenclitions
                  1.  Arrange to have necessary experimental work done in order to estab-
                  tisli appropr-.ate thresholds of effectiveness and safety for pulsed  currents.
                  The physiologic effects and ha7,ards of selected  pulsed  currents  could  be
                  substantially proved by appropriate observations wil-h a small se2ries of
                  experirnental  animals.  Corymon  domestic  animals,  such  as  pigs,  sheep,
                  and calves tl-at weigh about 70 kilograms,  provide  good  models  for  adult
                  men as  far  as  electrical  effects  are  concerned.  Audio-cinematographic,
                  electrocardiographic and,  pneumographic  recording  5hould  be  carried  out
                  with emphasis on the time of  onset  of  apparen2tly  incapacitating  muscular
                  contraction, cardiac and respiratory status during incapacity, the recovery
                  phase, and e.-,camina.tion of the sites of electrode placement.  Tirne-to-
                  incapacity, ability to make an outcry and time-to-rr: cover would  have  to  be
                  investigated with a small series of  unanesthetized  animals-P  other  phases
                  could use animals breathing spon2taneously under light anesthesia.  Judicious
                  increases in duration of the incapacitation period and the energy and frequen-
                  cy of the pulees should yield useful approximations of the desired thresholds
                  for burnans. Other studies on the operation  of  electrodes  and  power  supply
                  could be conducted at the same time.  Once burn thresholds have been estab-
                  lished, the "no-let-go2ll threshold could be docurnent2d with  a  brief  study
                  using a palm-to-shoulder current path in human volunteers.
                  Z.  Encourage development of systems  'to  fit  specific  needs.  Any  single
                  electrical system is unlikely to prove optimum for. all situatioris in  which
                  incapacitation is desired, especially with regard to  -naking  two  appropriate
                  electrica2l contacts with the subject's body and maintaining them '@f prolonaed
                  incapacitation is required.
                  3.  High voltage is likely to prove the most practical way to overcome the
                  skin resistan::e problem in many situations; if high voltige is used, the
                                                          25-
                                                                                          6   of

                 lil@eliliood of small-area third degree skin burns must be accepted.  I-figh
                 voltage systems will need special provisions to avoid: (1) delivering ex-
                 CCSSIVC Current to the subiect after a fall in sl<in resistance; (2) shocking
                 the orerator; or (3) short circuits that could destroy effectiveness of the
                 system before or aft2er the start of incapacitation.
                 4.  A shoit-range (arm's length) electrical current incapacitation device
                 could be operational in a few months.  The device cculd be a "pain dispen-
                 ser" carried in the hand, and could consist of a modified surgical towel
                 clip with battery- powered electronics to provide painful shocks.
                 5.  Proposed systems should be examined critically, especially with re-
          2       gard to the resistance problem and the location of the entry and exit points
                 for current flowing through the body.  Unless a system has a reliable rneth-
                 od of preventing current flow through the subject's chest, it should be
                 assumed that current will flow through the chest in some cases.  A single
                 electrode with "ground" system is likely to be dependable in special situa-
                 tions only.
                 62.  All systems intended to maintain incapacitation for more than a few
                 seconds shou:d deliver currents well above the "no-let-goll threshold in
                 order to insure that the subject will not be able to break contact manually.
                 7.  Operators should be aware that a subject's gun is likely to be fired if
                 the subject has a finger on the trigger at the moment electrical incapacita-
                1 tion starts.
                                                        Z6-

                I   Finkelstz!in, S. and E. M. Roth, "1--,Iectric Current" in NASA-CR- 1205
                (1)                     Responses to the Aerospace Evnivronment, ed.
                E, M. Rot 1-1, o ume   ational Aeronautics and Space Administration,
                Washington, November 1968, pp. 5-1 to S-Z3 (UNCL).
                2.  Maxwell, R. D. H. , "Electrical Factors in Electroconvulsive Therapy,
                Acta                     vica. Vol. 44, 19'c8, pp. 436-448 (UNCL).
                3.  I-lopps, S.A. , "Tile Systems Approach to Prcjte::tion" in r-lectric
                I-laza               ed. C. W. Walter, National Academy of Science,
                Washington, 1970, pp. 49-52 (UNCL).
                4@  Correll9, E. G. , personal cornmunication, Albucluerque, N. M. . October
                1971 (UNCL).
                5.  Zoll, P. M. , M. H. Paul, A. S. Linenthal, et al..  "The Effects of Ex-
                ternal Electric Currents on the Heart," Circulation,_Vol. XIV, November
                1956, pp. 745-756 (UNCL).
                                                     27-

