                                           INTERIM REPORT
                                               PART II
                                      LIGHT SOURCE EVALUATION
                                            February 1970

                        1.      FACTORS AFFECTING THE PERFORMAI%TCE OF PYROTECHNIC
                                MIXTURES
                                The object of this study is to investigate the feasibility of
                        utilizing high intense light emitted from rapidly burning p  otecrinic
                                                                                      yr
                        mixtures for optical incapacitation.  Several 2mixtures have been selected
                        for initial study.  The compositions of these mixtures were itemized in a
                        previous progress report. 1
                                It is useful to review the mechanisms of pyrotechnic burning and
                        th                       e
                          e important factors, r levant to light emission, so as     to fully under-
                        stand the utility of this approach.
             2           1.1     DESCRIPTION OF BURNING PROCESS
                                The basic ingredients of most pyrotechnic compositions consist
                        of a fuel and an oxidizer. These ingredients should be stable under
                        normal shelf conditions, yet they should be easy to ignite.  Further,
                        once ignition occurs, the heat released during burning should be
                        sufficient- icl.-cuistain the 2buming process.
                                It is useful to consider the following model to explain the burning
                        behaviorof,--e-,pyrateehn
                                Three thermal zones are established when an illuminating composi-
                        tion is ignited and bums propagatively (see Figure 1).
                                                      Air Flow
                       (D
                       2  Tf
                                                             B
                                                                                C
                                                  Flame
                         Ta
                                                                       x
                                                                            Tf  = Flame Temperature
                                                                            T
                1                                                             a  = Ambient Temperature
                                                                             x  = Distance Below
                                                                                   Burning Surface
                                         Figure  1.    Profile of Combustion Zone

                                Zone A is essentially the "burning su-face"   Both exothermic and
                        endothermic reactions talze place resulting in the formation  of  gaseous
                        fuel and oxidizer intermediates. These intermediates react exothermically
                        In the flame zone.  Usually the pyrotechnic  is designed to be fuel  rich
                        and the excess fuel.reacts with oxygen from  the  atmosphere.2  In   these
                        cases the flame size and intensity are somewhat dependent upon the
                        required environmental oxygen and its availability.
                                The energy required to form the reactive intermediates are
                                                                                            h
                        generated by the ekotherrhic reactions which occur in the flame zo e an
        2                in Zone A.  The dominant heat transport mechanisms are radiation feed-
                        back from the flame and conductive  transport  from  condensed  phase
                        reactions which occur in Zone A.  Energy from Zone A is also transferred
                        to Zone B which may be considered  the  pre-ignition  zone.  Directly
                        below Zone B is the remainder of the unreacted pyrotechnic composition,
                        or Zone C.
2
                                The radiative heat transport from the flame to Zone A can  be
                        described mathematically by the Stefan-Boltzmann equation
                                              4    4
                                  I     c CF (T  T
                                              f    o
                        where I is in terms of energy per unit area per unit time (e.g. ,cals/
                        cm2-sec)--i-,@e2p-,i-,sthe-eftriniv
                                                       at-the-fta
                        constant, F is a flame shape factor, Tf is the flame temperature and To
                        is the temperature of the surface receiving the radiation.
                                The temperature in Zone A is further affected by the local endo-
                        thermic and exothermic transitions which occur in  forming 2 the  reactive
                        intermediates. The important reactions which limit the  burning  rate  of
                        the pyrotechnic are the endothermic processes.    Typically, these
                        processes involve
                                a. phase changes, and
                                b. pyrolytic decomposition
                        to generate gaseous combustion reactants.
                                Under steady-state conditions the thin  pre-6ignition zone (i.e..
                        Zone   B) can be assumed to have  a  uniform  temperature.  For  simple
                        systems this zone  has  thic knesses in the molecular size range, and its
                        temperature is governed.almost completely by the endothermic processes
                        taken place.

                               The tempcrak'ure profile within the body of the pyrotechnic (i.e.
                        Zone C) can be approximated by the Rosenthal equation2
                                  TX    T  + (Ts - T  exp (-vx/a)                        (2)
                                                   0
                                         a
                        where Tx is the temperature at distance x2 below the reacting surface
                                           ambient temperature, T  is the temperature within.
                        (Zone B), Ta is the                       s
                        Zone B, v is the burning rate, and a, Is the thermal diffusivity of the
                        mixture: It should be noted that thermal diffusivity is related to more
                        conventionalthermal.-Properties,.,i.e.-,2-,.
                                                   2/sec
                                  cL   k/pc,    cm                                       (3)
                        where k is the thermal conductivity, p is.density and c is the specific
                        heat.
                        1.2    FACTORS-AFFECTING LIGHT OUTPUT
                               The distribution of radiation in any spectral region is determined
                        by t2he chemical nature and physical state of the products which emit in
                        that regio4 and the temperature reached by these emitting species. The
                        rate at which a pyrotechnic mixture burns depends an the amount and
                        rate at which heat is evolved. Sufficient heat must be produced to raise
                        reaction will be initiated and the reaction rate must be sufficient to
                        more than compensate 2for heat losses in order for the burning to be
                        sustained. Mathematically, the burning rate, v,,. can be related to the
                        energy fedback from the exothermic processes and the rate determining
                        endothermic process which must occur to produce the reactive inter-
                        mediate s
                                  v     E-(I)/p (AH + C AT)                              (4)
               2         where Z (I) is the radiative, convective and conductive heat flux fedback
                        to the pre-ignition zone, LH is the heat absorbed in the pre-ignition
                        zone by the endothermic processes and C AT is the heat required to
                        elevate the temperature of the pyrotechnic (i.e. , at the boundary between
                        Zones B and C) to the reaction temperature. The latter (pC AT), can be
                        best 2described as a heat loss term.
                               The rate of burning, the products formed, and the flame tempera-
                        ture are affected markedly by the compositiorr-of the mixture, as well as
                        by the physical condition of the materials and the ambient conditions
                        under which it is burned. Some of the more important factors which affect
                        the performance of light producing pyrotechnics which were c2onsidered in
                        our initial selection compositions are as follows,
                                                           3

                                  heat of reaction
                               2  composition of emitters
                               3  particle size
                               4. consolidation
                               5  pyrotechnic diameter
                               6  container design
                               1.2. 1   Heat of Reaction
                               The heat of a reaction is defined thermochemically as the
                2       difference between the thermodynamic heats of formation of the reactants
                       and products of the reaction. For example, referring to the energy dia-
                       gram shown in Figure 2, one selects a pyrotechnic mixture having
                       substituents which have a higher heat of formation than the reaction
                       products and one which requires a minimal amount of input energy,
                       &Ha, to initiate burning.
            2                                                       R     Pyrotechnic Components
                                                                         (Reactants)
                                                                   P     Combustion Products
                            0
                            >1                     A Ha
                            (D 0    R
                            >      Heat of Reaction
                          2                                                   p
                                               Reaction Path
                                       Figure  2.   Reaction Energy Diagram
                               One of the important factors in deter-mining the luminous intensity
                       of a light-producing pyrotechnic device is the temperature reached by the
                       emitting species in the flame and produced by the burning of the pyro-
                     2  technic mixture. The texnperature reached depends, in turn, on the
                       amount and rate at which energy is released by the reaction. Therefore,
                       the energy released during combustion sh                         ducts
                                                                ould be high and the pro
                       formed should be stable at the high temperatures necessary to produce the
                       desired lu inous intensity.
              1                    m
                                           77

                             1.2.2     Desirt-d Output Spuctra
                             The ultimate Pyrotec@nic composition must emit intense light in
                     regions most sensitive to the eye. It can be seen from the "standard
                     observer curve" , shown in Figure 3 that the eye Is only sensitive to a
                     very narrow region of electromagnetic radiation.
                                 0
                   2              >
                                                              650   is*
                                         Wavelength,  millimicron
                                     Figure 3.-  Standarct ObserverZiirvp--
                     This region extends between approximately 400 to 700 m,-a (or 4000 to
                     7000 Angstroms). In Figure 4, the visual response curve of the human eye
                     is shown. 2In this figure the effective radiation, In terms of photometric
                     units (lumens) as a function of wavelength is shown. The absolute
                     photopic luminosity is defined as the ratio of the electromagnetic flux
                     sensed by the eye (in units of lumens) to the total radiant flux (in terms
                     of watts). The most sensitive region in this narrow spectrum lies
                     between 500 and 560 mp. Therefore, for e2ffects related to visibility of
                     the light source, the pyrotechnic mixtures should be designed to emit
                     strongly in this wavelength region. A separate question arises as to
                     whether optical incapacitation effects are similarly correlated over the
                     visible range. This answer is not known at present-but will be assumed
                     to be positive for the present.
                             Special design features must b2e included in a pyrotechnic to
                     insure that a significant fraction of the total radiation emitted by the
                     flame is in the visible region. The emission from a pyrotechnic flame is
                     composed of line spectra, band spectra and continuum. The latter is
                     directly dependent on the temperature of the flame. The continuum is
                     essentially blackbody or greybody radiation. The distribution of the radiant
                3     energy versus wavelength can be estimated from Planck's equation
                                                       s

                                                                                                                                               
I Ali,
           %4
                                                                                              Absolute Photopic Luminosity of Radiant Flux,,
Lumen/Watt
                       (D
                                                                                                 C:)  2                                        
c:@                                                         CD
                                                                                                  c:l
                                   C:)
                   0
                       In
                                   C)
                   0
                       En
                   n
                       0
                       2Ca     <
                       0      M    En
                                   C)
                              to
                   (D  (D
                   (D  0
                   0   r+
                   CA)             C:)
                                   C>
                              0
                              0
                       tri
                                   C)
                       0(D
                       0
                       r+
                                   co L
                                   C:)
                                   col
                       ta.
                       0
                       m

                                                      2 h
                                                  2  c
                                               5 (exp'(hc/k X T) - 1)
       -,-j                                                       f energy per             r unit
       t               where I     is the radiant flux, in terms  0            unit area pe
                       time at wavelength X, emitted by a hot source at temper2ature T, h is
                                                                              zmann S constant
                       Plancl.-I's constait, c is the speed of light, k is Bolt
                                                                  pical flux-wavelength distri-
                       and r:, is the emissivity of the  flame.  Ty
                       butions calculated from  this  equation  are shown in Figure S.
                                   2         350
                                          0            MAX
                                                0
                                            30
                                        C,]
                                          F-
                                            250  -
                                            200
                                          >4
                                          4-A
              2                            4
                                              150.
                                             too  -               T  3000*K
                                                                     2500*K
                                          lz                      Te2OOOOK
                                                                         *K
                                                                  T  2I 00
                                               so-
                                               OOL, A "Z Ia    3     4    5    0
                                                   Wavelength,      Microns
                            Figure S.     Planck's Law: Radiance as a Function of Wavelength
                                          for  Various  Temperatures
                          It can be seen from this figure that very little of the energy emit2ted by
                          blackbody radiation is distributed in the wavelength band most sensitive
                          to the eye. Further, in.order to generate an intense source in the visible
                          spectrum, a very high flame temperature will be required and even under
                                                  iciency  of the source in terms of the fraction of
                          these conditions the eff
                          visible light energy7 generated out of the total radiation energy would be
                          very low.
                                                               7

                                                 e Pvrotechnic Ingredients
                              1.2.3      Des-irabl
       ,4                     This observation leads one to recognize that pyrotechnics
                       composed of organic fuels which have the highest heat  of  reaction  can-
                       not be considered since these mixtures produce flames having character-
                       i stic ssimilar to blackbody emitters. This is p2articularly true for fuel
                       rich compositions which have a tendency to generate significant amounts
                       of carbon and aromatic soot particles.
                              The radiant,emiss@iomin-the-v-isihl-t--canz-b(.-improved-by-in@c-ludirfg--,-@,',@--
                       chemicals in the pyrotechnic mixtures that will form thermally excit2ed
                       reaction products capable of emitting radiation at  desired  wavelengths.
                       This process can be described by the following equation,
                              A  +  B           + heat             EC*           C + hv        (6)
                                             LC
                          Pyrotechnic        Reaction             Thermally         Light
                          Components          Product in          Excited           Emission
                                              Flame               Product
                                                                      -ies
                                                                  Spec
                       Many inorganic salts exhibit this phenomena.    Several  elements   which
                       react in pyrotechnic flames forming oxides, hydroxides and chlorides
                       have been used to "co2lor" flames. These include, strontium which
                       produce* A,-.re-d--czlDr,-ba
                       green and orange) and copper (blue to green). Lithium (red), boron
                       (green), thallium (green), rubidium (red) and cesium (blue) are also
                       strong color producers but their use is not as practical because of cost,
                       toxicity or the nature of their compoun2ds.
                               The actual emitting species of these metals are known to be
                       the di- and tri-atomic sp6cies which can exist at high tem peratures   in
                       the  flame.  For example,
                                a.  the red light produced by flares containing
                                    strontium and a source of chlorine is a
                                    result of SrCl emission (strong emission
            2                        near 640 MP). In the absence of chlorine,
                                    emission has been attributed to SrO.
                                b.  BaCl2 emits in the 505-535 MP region
                                    (green)..
                                c.  BaO emits over a broad spectrum, 400 to
                                    800 MP
                                                            8
 4                              7:-7

                               d.  The hydroxides of these melals also emit in
                                   the respective wavelength bands.
                                                                       4
                               e . MgO emits at apprcximately 500 m
                               1.2.4     Color Intensifiers
                                                           e
                               Where possible, chlorides ar 2added to the pyro'Lechnix mixtures
                       to enhance the color of the flame. Perchlorate oxidizers contribute the
                       minimal requirements without reducing the efficienc)@- of -the energy out-
      -7,              put. In some cases it has been found that the addition of chloro-
                       organics significantly increase the color intensity. Substances such as
                       hexachlorethane, hexachlorobenzene, polyvinylchloride are sometimes
                       employed for this purpose.
                       2 .     CRITERIA USED TO SELECT CANDIDATE PYROTECHNIC
                               MIXTURES
                                                          --were--ma@de in selecting candidate
                               The following cori-siderations
                       pyrotechnic formulationsl for the initial experimental investigations.
                       Based2'on the,premis-ed, desirability of producing flames w-hichemit
                       radiation in the visible wavelength region,primary consideration has
                       been given to inorganic compositions.
                       2.1     OXIDIZER
                               Comprehensive literature surveys by Shock Hydrodynamics and
                       other investigators have shown that perchlorates are the most desirable
              2         oxidizers. They contain a relatively high ratio of oxygen to total mole-
                       oular weight, their heats or reaction with metals such as aluminum and
                       magnesium are significantly better than other oxidizers and they generate
                       only oxygen as a gaseous product. Perchlorates are gererally stable,
                                                                                        m
                       yet they are easily ig2nited, unlike oxidizers such as nitrates and  etallic
                       oxides. Nitrates'@uffer additional disadvantages in that they are not
                       as exothermic and thus tend to have a slower burning rate with fuels such
      z                as aluminum and magnesium (see Equation 4), and they generate a non-
                       reactive gaseous product, nitrogen.
                               Of the alkali perchlorates, lithium and sodium perchlorates h2ave
                       the highest rates of oxygen to total molecular weight, viz., 64/106.4
                       and 64/127.45, respectively. However, these compounds are extremely
                       hygroscopic. This characteristic decreases the storage life of a pyro-
                       technic system. The absorption of water by these oxidizers is an'exo-.
                       thermic process. Becatise of this factor one must also be concerned
            7           with the design of special safety precautions.
                                                          9

                               Potassium parclilorate was selected as a primary oxidizer for the
                        initial candidate mixtures. This oxidizer has an  oxygen-total  weight
                        ratio of 64/138.55, which is somewhat lower than LiClO4 and NaClO4,
                        however, it is a stable compound and its heat of reaction with aluminum,
                        for example, is slightly greater than the 2reactions between LiClO4  or
                        NaClO4 and aluminum.
                        2.2    FUEL COMPONENTS
                               It has been found that aluminum and magnesium are the best fuels
                        for use.in photoflash mixtures. The heat of reaction and peak light
                        intensities resulting from Al/KC104 are much higher than equivalent
                        Mg/KC104 compositions.2 The radiation emitted follows generally what
                        would be expected for continuum radiation. Peak light intensities for
                        stoichiometric mixtures of Al/KC104 and Mg/KC104 have been measured
                        to be approximately 40 and- 18 million candles. respectively.-
                        2.3    CONSOLIDATION OF MIXTURE
                               It has been shown,  that the manner in which the fuel and oxidizer
                   2     are incorporated in the pyrotechnic device will greatly influence its
                        performance.5 Consolidated compositions contain binders, usuall)@
                                          -Waich-fnrTn a-itgid-@nt
                        orga nic. -pol, mzr:*
                                  y
                        dated composition however is a burning system which has a relatively
                        large spa2tial separation between fuel and oxidizer. Thus, the burning
                        rates are relatively slower than a comparative non-consolidated system.
                        Non-consolidated systems under confinement usually have higher
                        deflagration rates than consolidated systems and the intensity of  the
                        emitted light is greater.  Most photoflash -systems are thus non-
                        consolidated, and this type of system was selected for thes2e studies.
                        2.4    OUTPUT   IMPROVEMENT   (SELECTION   OF    STANDARD    MI:KTURE)
                               A standard photoflash composition, III..;A, was selected  as  a
                        reference. The composition of this mixture is shown in Table I  The
                        addition of barium nitrate to this mixture increases the radiation output
                        in the visible spectrum over that of the basic  Al/KC104  mixture.  As
         2               discussed in a previous section, the BaO and BaCI2 formed in the burning
                        processes emits strongly in the wavelength region most sensitive to the
                        eye.
                                2.4.1      Mixture "D"
                                During the Korean conflicts an experimental photoflash mixture
                        having a very high fuel to oxidant ratio was developed having a peak
                 0                                           i n

                                                                                 -ASH
                                                              OF
                             TABLE   I.  ClUiPP%.CTERISTICS     TYPE III  PliOTOF1
                                          COMPOSITION6
                                                                                        Percen
                              Ingredi2ents                   Specification    Microns
                      Aluminum, atomized                     JAN-A-289           is       40
                                                             PA-PD-254           24       30
                        Potassium Perchlorate
                                                             PA-PD-253          147       30
                        Barium Nitrate
                        pHysiCo-CHE AICAL DKTA:
      2                  Heat of Reaction, cal/g-/-.774 (calc)
                                      rature, OG-approx- 3500
                        Reaction  Tempe
                        Gas Volume, cr-/g-24 (caic)
                        Tapped-1.67
                                      OC,  cc  gas/40  hrs-O  16
                            Stab,   120
                        Vac
                        SENSITIVITY DATA:
           2             Impact:                        PA, inches-40 +
                                                       Steel-Crackles; Fiber-No Action
                        Friction Pend:
                                                                         'DTA-NO Ignition
                        Ignition Temp, OC:             s sec value-610;
                                                                         p;,Hrs 24;
                        Hygroscopicity2:                57% RH, room tem
                                                       % Wt Gain < 0.1
                        Electrostatic
                                                       Joule, Min 2.14; so% Pt-3.5,
                        Sensitivity:
                                                               -4.5; Temp-65OF;
                                                       100%   Pt
                                       6                % RH-40: Unconfined-Yes

                        light output tv@iice that of the Type III mixture. This mixture consisted of
                        70% Al/30% KC104.     Afurther improvement in performance is anticipated
                                                                I    W              which  will
                        by replacing a  portion of the I--ClO4 oxid'zcr  ith Ba(NO3)2
                        act as an oxidizer  and color enhancer 2(see Table II for compositions of
                        candidate   pyrotechnic mixtures).
                                                        TABLE II
                           Pyro*                                  Arbitrary Type Designation
                        Composition                        A        B           c             D
                        Designation
                        Ingredients                        %        %           %             %
    2                           Al                          40       .50         25           70
                               KC10                        30       40          30           20
                                    4
                                                           30                   10           10
                               Ba(NO3)2
                               Ca Si                                10
                               Mg 2                                              3S
                        TOTAL
                                                       7TO 0        100         100         100
                        *All mixtures prepared in accordance with PA-PD-267.
                               TYPE A     Follows the formulation given in PA-PD-267 for
                                          Type III Class A (Fine Oxidizers
                               TYPES 7B, C, & D follows the same guidelines     including
                                          particle size given in PA-PD-267.
                                                           12

                               2.4.2     Mixture "B"
                               The addition of calcium silicide should have two ef" cts on the
                        basic Al/KC104 reaction:
                               1.  Because of the exothermic nature of CaSi  in an
                                   oxidizing environment, the heat of reaction of
                                   this mix should be greater than the selected
                  2                 reference-@i,.e-,.mixture A)-.--.This-incT-e4,se-An-
                                   the heat of reaction will raise the flame tempera-
                                   ture and the radiation intensity of the flame.
                               2.  The flame emission of calcium is at 550 and
                                   620 m@4 . This is in the yellow-green and ora2nge
                                   areas of the spectrum and as can be seen from
                                   Figure 4 should improve the flame luminosity in the
                                   most sensitive wavelength regions.
                               A smaller percentage of calcium silicide than barium nitrate is
                        required because of molecular weight differences. Calcium has an
                        atomic weight of less than a third that of barium. Thus, on a2 weight
                        basis cal-cium should be more efficient.
                               2.4.3     Mixture "C
                               It has been observed that the use of magnesium-aluminum fuel
                        mixture s re s ult s in fla s he s of I ong er duration. Thi s fuel c ombination i s
                        also easier to ignite as compared with aluminum. Mixture 'IC " was
                        therefore formulated for purposes of determining the 2differences in
                        potential effectiveness with flash duration.
                        2.5    PARTICLE AND SHELL SIZE
                               The same guidelines of particle size suggested for the reference
                        photoflash mixture (designation "A") are being used for the other mixtures.
                        This control is necessary so as to minimize the number of unknown
                        experimental parameters.
                               A2 representative array of shell sizes have been included in the
                        experimental plan. These shells were described in Reference 1. AU
                        of the casings are composed of aluminum.
                        2.6    METHOD OF INITIATION
                               An addi*lional variable which was included in the experimental
                        plan was the method  of initiation. Simple central burster initiation'as
                      3  well as an imploding initiation system are included in the test  Ian for
                                                                                       p
                        comparison.

                                                    REFERENCES
                     2.  D.  Rosenthal, Trans. Amer. Soc. Engrs. 68, 849 (1946).
                     3.   R. L. Tischer and K. Scheller, "A Gaseous System of High Luminous
                          Efficiency", (Presented at the Western States Combustion Institute
                          Meeting, 1967), ReportVV'SCI-67-12, Aerospace Research Labs.
                     4.  2 D. M. Johnson, "Proposed Kinetics and Mechanics of Illuminant
                          Flares: Maximizing Efficiency", U. S. Naval Ammunition Depot,
                          RD-TR-32 (June 1966), AD 627 649.
                     5 .  'The Compilation of -Flame and Shockwave Information Applicable
                          to Photoflashes", Final Summary Report, Contract DAI-28-017-
                          501-ORD(P)-1096, Arthur D. Little Inc. (September 19055
                     6    Engineering Design Handbook, "Military Pyrotechnics Series",
                          AMCP 706-185, U. S. Army Materiel Command (April 1967
       4
                                                       14

                                              L SUMMARY R-RPORT
                                          FINA
                                                 PART 2
                                        LIGHT SOURCE EVALUATION
                                                June 1970

                                                               'fAr)LL OF 00@,"IEIV'TS
                                1      11@TRODUCTION        . . . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       1
                                2 .    DESCRIPTION      OF       EXPERIhIEl@,T!iL
                                       PIIOTOFL)\SH DEVICES        2   . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       2
                                       2.1         Photoflash Cartridge, Type S           . . . .  .  .  .  .  .       2
                                       2.2         Photofla sli Cart-ridge-" Type SDE                                  2
                                       2.3         Photoflash Shell, Type SS         ... . . .  .  .  .  .  .  .       2
                                       2.4         Photoflash S2hell, Type SSDE            . . . .  .  .  .  .  .       2
                                3 .    DESCRIPTION        OF        EXPERIMENTS . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       5
                                       3.1         Experimental Arrangement          .  . .  . .                       .5
                                       3.  2       Detector Calibration         . . . . . . .     : .. ., - . .,.      5
                                    2   3  .3       Experimental Errors        . . . . .... . .  .  .  .  .  .  .       6
                                4.     EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS              . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       9
                                       4.1         Comparison Between Reported and
                                                   Measured Output of Type III Mixture              . .  .  .  .       9
                                       4.2         Comparison -Bet2,.veen Charges           ... . . .  .  .  .  .       9
                                5      DISCUSSION OF POTENTIAL FLASH
                                       BLINDNESS EFFECTS            .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    .    .    .       17
                                       5.1         Permanent      Eye      Damage  .  . . . . .                        17
                                       5  .2       Recovery Time to Light Flashes            . .2 . .  .  .  .  .       19
                                       5.2.1       Review of Flash Blindness Experiments               . .  .  .       19
                                       5 .2.  2    Additional Observations         . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .  .       22
                                       5  .3       Interpretation of Results                 . . . . . . . .    .      24
                                       5.3.1       Illumination of Pho'Loflash       . 2. . .  ...  .  .  .  .  .       24
                                       5.3.   2    Estimated    Eye     Effects . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       24
                                6.     CONCLUSIONS           . . . . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       31
                                       6.1         Cartridge Design        . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       31
                                       6.  2       Pliotoflash Mixture        . . . 0. . . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       31
                                       6  .3       Data Intorprctations       .              . . . .  .  .  .  .       31
                                REFERENCES      . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       32
                                APPENDIX      I . . . . . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .  ...  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       33

                         1      INTIIO))IICTIOlq
                                The objectivo of this investigation of pyrotechnic light sources was
                         confined primarily to the evalucition of output illumination levels, the
                         factors controlliiig them and comparisons with the existing criterizi for
                    2     optical incapacitation, since tlicse considerations determine ilie suit-
                         ability of such a system to a variety of possible weapon applications.
                               The effort was directed primarily at comparisons of existing
                         threshold energies for incapacitation and damage, pyrotechnic output
                         energies, and the'fabrication of test device-s with controlled parameters2,
                         followed by estimation of their output energies by means of appropriate
                         instrumentation.  The approach permitted a comparison with existing data
                         on energy levels corresponding to optical incapacitation and damage.
                         this comparison was used to obtain first order estimates of the effective.
                         ranges at which these pyrotdchnic illumination devices would-either
                   2      incapacitate or permanently damage exposed personnel.
                               The four pyrotechnic light mixtures sho'@vn in Table I were evaluated
                         during this investigation.  In the follo@ving sections there are presented
                         the methods and techniques employed, results obtained, and-the con'clu-
                         sions regarding the feasibility of this approach..
                               -TABLE           2              0-r@EXPERIM-ENMt-
                               C omposition
                               Des.ignation                   A          B         c           D
                               Inqrc!dients                   %         %          %         %
                               Al                             4b        70         25        50
                               KC103                          30 7       20         30        40
                               BA(NO 3)2                      30        10         10
                               Ca(Si)                                                        10
                                     2
                               M g
                                                                                   35

                     saw
                       2     DESCI'11"fION OF                 I'IfOTO'I:".f,,'@Sll J--)T@',Vj(:,ES
                             A brief description of the charges was included in the Final Sumiiiiry
                       Report - Part I.  Two basic Pliotoflisli cartridges were empl2oyed.  Design
                       drawings of these cartridges are presented in Figurc-s 1 and 2.  The per-
                       forniance of each of the four selectcd pyr -otechnic mixtures xvds evaluated
                       in cich cartridge design.  The specifications of eacli of the miytures'
                       were previously described (see Reference 1) .
                       2. 1  PHOTOFLTkSI2-j'. CARTRIDGE, TYPE S
                             The outer diameter of the Type S photoflash cartridge is 2.7 in.
                       and the length is 6.6 in.  The outer shell is made of aluminum.  A scale
                       drawing of the cartridge is shown in Figure 1.  A linear charge of DuPont
                       PETN prima;:;ord, .22 in. diameter and 5.25 in. long, was surrounded by
                       the photoflash mix.  This centra2l bursting charge was ifsed to break the
                       casing, and to ignite and disperse the pyrotechnic mixture.
                       2.2   PHOTOFLASH CARTRIDGE, TYPE SDE
                             This cartridge was idenlical to the type S with the exception th-at
                       DuPont Deta -sheet-explosive-was wrapped around the, exterior-cylindrical
                       wall of the Type S cartridge.  These sheets were cut, as show2n in Figure 1,
                       to permit the complete coverage of the outer wall.  The purpose of this
                       nated, in an attempt to improve the light output (i.e. , as discussed in
                       the last progress report, the rate of burning and light output should
                       increase with the degree of charge compaction) .. The ignition train was
                       designed so that the Deta sheet would be detonated before the central
     2                  bursting charge.
                       2.3  PHOTOFIASH SHELL, TYPE SS
                             The Type SS shotgun shel I has an O.D. -of 0. 853 and a length of
                       3.20 in.  It is also made of aluminum. Except for dimensions, this
                       photoflash shell design is similar to the '&.7 in. photoflash cartridge
                       (see Figure 2).
                       2.4  PHOTOFLASII SHELL, TYPE SSDE9
                             This shell is identical to the Type SS, with the exception that
                       'Dupont Deta sheet is wrapped around the cylindrical body in a similar
                       manner as the -SDE.-
                                                           2

              7Ai)APT--P (-r%fP)               EN ri  C-H@:i:T                              S PAC F- R                         I
                       K I I.Io-                               r-
                                               Si-ir'E- '-HARI-,'                           CLOSUPt:"- CASE, -St@ lt@ZI-I
                       2       W cr:A T H v-,R           i< 113   I
                                                                                                                                             C
Pt
                                                                                                                      WALL SP!-.-
                                 E A      (-ryR) '5K I 11@)
                                                                              2                                              (SDE DESIGN
OIK.-LY),,,,.
                                                                                                                                            tt
L k"k
                                                                                                                                     'E3 PA- 7,
                                                C u S2!q Io,\'. -                     L3 &
                                                                                                                                      ;:=@ k,-"
II 4,-
                                                                                               K
                                                                                       J PI   'TueE (T\@
                                  -LI,'-rLAP, C--@IARGE        (-r                                          P)
                                           1-<  I I'Z7                                  I I -z e,
                               TUBEILI@IEAR'@HA@Q%GE
                   OUTPUT CHAPGE.
                                                         FIGURE  1.      2.7@" PHOTOI'-LASH CAPTRIDC-9[-:
                                                                                        CAL br..  I / I

     rAc
                                                                  T U -0
                 II'     R'@
               D t't P T E   :ai@) I 11
                                                                              S P/@, C L  SKIII;'--
                                  5EAL
                                                                                     C L t)
            2                                                                         CA'@-)E
                                                                                                                  (SSDE DESIGN OLN- LY)
                       0..U',rPUT C14A.RGF--
                                                                                                                                        L
                                 2                                                                                                     Cr
                                                                                                                                      r!j,
                                                                                                                                      %.. A.. r
                     LtNr,AP, CI-IARGE
                    2                        4AR&E
                                                                                                                       21
                                                                            C L 0 5 U R E , 'I" I,- C'  @,.K I I
                                                                                            @T- Y P.*
                       FIGURE  2.                   PI-AO-%C)7FLf-\r5lA            C A P-'T 14     D -6 E.

                        3                     C)j"
                              The c:,:poriiiientzil tccliriiqiics employc@d and the sl)c.@cific experiments
                        performed arc otitliiie-d iii tliis- s--ction.
                        3.1   EXPERIMENTP.L AP-,rlvl@NIGEMENT
                    2          The intensity of the liglit output  as  a  function  of  time  w&s  measured
                        and recorded using a silicon pl-iotodiode (United Detector Technology Inc.,
                        PIN-10) and Li Tel-,tronix 535 oscilloscope  with  a  Polaroid  filra  attachment.
                        The  PIN-10  photodiodc  has  a  half-value  response  between   3800   and
                        1050O X.  The photodiode, PIN-10, was protected from fragments generated
                        from the e:@-.plosive dissemination by a  metal  shield.  The  light  from  the
                        flash was indirectly focused  on-to  the  PIN-10  sensor  using  a  mirror.
                             A Corning 1-56 filter  was  placed  in  front  of  the  PIN-10.  This  filter
                        has transmission characteristics similar to the eye response.  It has a
2                        near gaussian  trans  m@ssion  curve  between  3600  and  7000  X,with  a  peak
                        transmission at 5200 A. The ultraviolet  is  cut-off  at  3600  A  and  less  than
                        10% of the I-IZ radiation,(i.e.,  between  1  and  4.5  micror-s)  can  be  trans-
                        mitted through this  filter.  Depending  on  the  expected  output  of  each  test
                     2   device, nolitral density filters were  also  used  so  that  the  PIN@10  would
                        operate within its linear response regime (i.e.  so that light intensit)@
                        versus output voltage would remair, linear)
                                                                   -%-;as fed into a Tektronix  535
                             The output sign,-:11 from the sensor
              2          oscilloscope with a 50 ohm tormin;ltion.  The signals were permanently
                        recorded  using  a  Polaroid  camera  attachment.  The   oscilloscope   and
                        event were triggered using a 5 KV firing panel.
                             The events were also monitored photographically. A speed graphic
                        single exposi-ire camera and a.Beckman & Whitley Dyiiafax motion picture
                        came2ra  were  used  with  Polaroid  filters.  The  Dynafax  camera  was   operated
                        at a framing rate of  3000  -frames  per  second..  Both  cameras  were  protected
                                                                               -hind  a  barricade  and
                        from the blast.  The Dynafax camera was located be
                        received the light from the photoflash via a frbnt surface mirror.  The
                        speed 1graphic camera was located behind thick glass.
                        3.2   DETECTOR CALIBRATION
                             The PIN-10 photodetector was calibrated using a Nation        al Bureau
                        of Standards certified light solirco.  The response of the detector was
                        measured as a  function  of  distance  away  from  the  standard  source  using
                        the following equation

                                            K- F    V   D
                       where
                              I    is the intensity of the light source in candle-pov@er,
                              K    is  the calibration factor, 2640 foot-candles pcr
                                   38.  07 millivolts response,
                              F    is  the factor  wli ich compensates for the transmission
                                   of  the n2ouaal density filters,
                              V    is  the output signal, volts, generated by the photo-
                                   detector, and
                              D    is the optical distance between the PIN-10 photo-,
                                   detector and the light source.
                              The  spectral  response  characteristics  of  the  photodetector  are
                        shown in Figure 3.  The relative spectral sensitivi2ty of the PIN-10 with
                        the Corning 1-56 filter was calculated.  These results are presented in
                        Figure 4.
                              The  optical   distance between  the  light  sources  and  the  photo-
                        detector was 23.5 feet ii@i dach'experiment.  The intefrisity of the source
                        expressed in candle-power was calculated using Eq. (1).  The'values of
2                        candle-power estimated can be interpreted directly in terms of the
                        luminous flux traveling through a normal plane which intersects the light
                        path I foot away from.the source (i.e.  ,  the  density  of  luminous  flux
                        incident on a normal surface one foot away from a 1 candle-power source
                        is  1  lumen/ft2).
                        3.3   EXPERIMENTAL ERRORS
2
                              An  experiment  was  performed  to  determine  the  amount  of  light
                        received by the photo-detectors via wall reflection. A General Electric
                        No. 22 photoflash bulb was placed 23.5 ft. away from the photo-detector
                                                                   @a sh pyrot
                        in a similar manner as were the photofl,             echnic test devices.
                        Black 2paper was placed directly in front of the flash bulb to prevent direct
                        light transmission to the photo-detector. When compared with a control
                        test in which the light bc-irrier was not used, it was calculated that less
                        than 5% of the light received  by  the  photo-detector  was  due  to  light
                        reflections from the walls of the test chamber. As a precaution, in subse-
              2          quent tests, all light colorr-@d objects were removed from the test chamber
                                                                         -iiiiber wc-re washed down
                        before each experiment., The walls of the ch,
                        after each test, also, to remove any debris which might increase the
                        light  reflection.
                                                               6
              7              lpi

                                                             Wcivelength, p
                                     0.2  0. 3  0. 4        0. 6         0.8          1. 0        1.2
                                  1.00                                                                       100
                                                                                             I      I  .-    go
                 2                                                                      Relative         -    80
                                  0.80-                                                  Sensitivity
                                                                                                             70
                                  0. 60 -                                                                    60
                               U')            2         Quantum.------"C-
                                                       Efficiency                                            so
                                CD
                                  0.40                                                                       40
                               0
                                                                                                             30
                            >1  2-4
                            4@ o
                            14                     /...n-Absolute Sensitivity
                            >
                            4- 0
                            --4                                                                                  >1
                                  0. 20                                                                      20
                               >2
                            0
                            @Q CD
                                                                                                             lo
                               (D 0. 10
                                                                                                                 CY
                               4-J                                                                             9
                              2    O. 08                                                                        8
                                                                                                               7
                                  0. 06 -                                                                      6
                                  0.04 -                                                                       4
                                                                  2                                             3
                                  0. 02
                                     2, 000       4, 000'      6, 000       8, 000     10, 000      12,    000
                                                                                  0
                                                                  Wavelength, A
                                   Figure   3. 0   Spectral Char,-ictcristics of the    United       Technology
                                                  PIN-10 Photodiode
                                                                         7

                            1. 0
                            0.9
                                    Rela f4.ive Response                  @*--Relative Response o
                                       Eye                                        Eye (Day)
                                           (Night)
                           0.8
                           0.7
                           0.6 r                               2                        elative Sensitivity
                                                                                       f PIN-10 Phot
                                                                                                    odiode
                                                                                      W,
                           0.5                                                           h Corning 1-56
                                              2                                        Filtter
          co             C.)
                         >
                         '4'J 0.4
                         ri
                           0.3
                          0. 2
                          0.1
                                  400       450
                                                       500       bbu        600
                                                           6    Wave Length (m P)
                                  Figure  4.   Comparison of Eye. and Photodetector Sensitivity Curve.

                                                                                               Elko
                      4                   P,.UO,'Ujr.TS
                            --------------
                            The MoOc-urccl out
                                            Puts versus tilne for each       Perimental
                      photoflzisli dcvic,@-,s are 8]io%,,,n in rig   of the Lx            re
                                                        urcs 5 tlirough 8. I'llese figures we
                      drax,..,n from t],e oscilloscope traces ol.)tained in ach experiment. The
                     results of each photoflash cirtridge design wore combined so-tliat a..
                2     ready coinp,-Irison could be made regarding the relative perl'Ormance of the
                     light output from each of the four pyrotechnic mixtures. The peak light
                     intensities, the half width of intensity-time and the total integrated area
                     under each curve (.i.e., total light output in candle-power-seconds) are
                     reported in Table 11. T2he maximum cloud size  generat.ed by each -device
                     is also included in this table. The -latter data was obtained irom the
                     film record@ taken.
                     4.1  COMI)APISON DENVE-EN REPORTED AND MEASURED
                          OUTPUT OF TYPE III MIXTURR
                          Mixture A has a composition identical to the standard Type III (I e. ,
                    mixtur2e P-@:) photofla-sh mix. This Type III plioloflash mixture has previously
                    been used in a variety.of standard photoflash cartridges. Light output data
                    was obtained for this mixture,' from other sources, and is summarized in
                    Figure 9. . The peak inten.-,ities'and integrated candle-po er-secon@is total
                    output are plotted as a function of char ie
   2                                                      g    ze in pounds. Approximations
                    of best-fit curves were drawn through each set of data as shown. The
                   arrow on the abscissa represents the charge weight of the pyrotechnic
                    mixture s in the Type S cartridge, 1. 4 Ibs'.
                         The predicted peak 'ntensity and total output for this charge are,
                   respectively, 2.3 2x 108 c. p. and 4.4 x 106 c. p. s. The experimental
                   values obtained durin the tests- on this program were 1. 96 x 108 c
                                                                                  .P. and
                   2. Ox 106 C. p s. (see Table II) . The7se data are considered to b
                                                                                e in rea-
                2   sonable agreement and provide an additional check on the accuracy of the
                   measuring techniques and the charge preparaitions.
                   4.2  COMPARIS(D'N 'BTTWEEN CHARGES
                        Based on the peak intensity data', the overall performance of the
                  Ty,pe A mixtures in.the various shells was the best. In order of decreas-
                  Ing performance it was found that
                            A > C >3 B > D
                  The peak intensity of the output however is not the only criterion that
                  should be used in evatua'&,ing the perfori,,ianc '
                                                            e of a mixture for this appli-
                  cation. The dureition of the light pulse is of equal importance. From
                                                   9

                 200
                 180 -           SA                                                    A, B, C and D refer to the type of
                                                                                       pyrotechnic mixture used (see
                                                                                       Table I).
                 160 -
               0
                 140
                 120--
               C2>
                               SB
               x ioo                                SC
               >1
                  8 0
                  60
                  40-
                  20-;                         SD
                    o
                    0    2     4    6   6    1 0  1 2  1 4  1 6  18   20    2 2 2 4  2 6   28   30   32  34    3 6  38   40  42
                                                             Time, milliseconds
                                                 Figure S.  Light Output From  Series  SPhotoflash Units

                                                                                          A, B, C and D refer to the
                                                                                            rotechnic mixture used (see
                                                                                          py
                   30
                                                                                          Table I).
                   25
             2   0                        SDEA
                   20
                to
                x
                >1               SDED
                41                                         SDEB
                                                                                                    S DEC
                   lo
                                                                                      lb
                                                                   2                                    41b
                          ,10
                    0
                            2    4    6    8    10   12   14    16  .18   20   22   24   26   28    30   32   34   36   38   40    42
                                                               Time, milliseconds
                                               r- I citp*e 6lirjht Outyput F'rom 'geries 4grpr- 'Pl@otaflosh ttv@it4

                                                                             I                                T
                     4.8
                                                                                                                 A, B, C and D refer to the
                     4.  4                                                                                       pyrotechnic mixture used (see
                                                          2                                                       Table I).
                     4.0
                     3.  6
                     3.  2
                 u
                to   2.8
                 C)
                     2.  4
                                                                     'SSG
                     2.  0
                     1.  6                     S SA
                 4J
                     1.2
                        2                       SSB
                     0.8
                                                                                                                       SSD
                     0.4                                        .......                                      ............
                                            ...........    ",SSD                                                                               
.........
                      6   0
                          0      1     2      3      4     5      6     7     8      9     10   'll     12      13   14     15    16     17    
1C    19     20   21
                                                                                    Time, milliseconds
                                                          Figure   7.   Light Output From Series SS Photoflash Units

                     4.8
                                                                                                                A, B, C and D refer to the
                                                                     SSDEA                                      pyrotechnic mixtured used (see
                     4.
                                                                                                                Table I).
                     4.20
                  0
                     3.   6
                     3.   2
                  CD                               SSDEB
                     2.   8                                                                              SSDEC
                  x
                     2 .
                          4
                     2.0
                     1.   6
                  i-4                                  S'S D' ED
                   2  1.2
                     0.8
                     0.4
                          0                                                               10     11    12      13   14    .15    16   17     
18     19    20
                           0     1      2     3     4      5     6      7     8     9                                                          
2 1
                                                                0               Time,'millisec.onds
                                                           Figure B.     Light Output From Series SSDE Photoflash Units

                                                         'rAl3LL@' 11.  SUj"lilVil@,T',Y 01@ TEST iIE@-!ULTS
                                 Sample               Pc-a k                  I-ii I f     t           Totiil              Poak
                                      Type        C,.-I II @ic-Po%,jer         Duration     2         Output           Cloud Size
                                                    (1   0   cp)                    (msec)          (1 0  3                lft
                                 - ---------
                                 SA                   19  5.  7                     9.8             2010                   7.4
                                 S   B                   9  7.8                     15. 5         2  1579                   7.  5
                                 SC                   10  3.  6                     17.8            2 02  1                7.  1
                                 S   D                   9.   5                     40. 4            371                   3i5
                                 S     DEA               29.  8                     20. 7            52   6                7.  0
                              2   SDEB                    19.  5                     20. 1            375                   7.  0
                                 SDEC                    20.  3                     18. 3            49   3                7.  3
                                 SDED                    20.  5                     16.4             354                   4.  3
                                 SSA                     1.99                       4.  0            2  10.   3             ---
                                 SSB                     0.   99                    6.  0                  7.8             1.8
                                 ssc                     2.81                       5.4                17.   1             2.4
                                 SSD                     .0.  57                    20. 0                  8.8             1.  5
    2                             SSDEA                   5.   59                    8.  3              52.   9             2.8
                                 SSDEB                   2.   64                    9.  1              29.   0             3. 5.
                                 SSDEC                   3.   02                    12. 7              40.   2             3.  2
                                 SSDL--D                 2.   714                    13. 0              28.   6             2.  7
                                 *S    and SDE refer to the       type of photofla-sh cartridge used.  A,               B, C and
                                 D   refer   to   the   pyrotechnic    mixture    used    (see    Table    I).
                                                                                    14

                        Aik,
                          whom
                                                                                                                       100
                          1000
                                                      Peak Light Intens
                                                                                                                            0
                        ri
              2          C>                                                 Z<- Integral Light Output
                        x                                                                                                   C:>
                                                                                                                            0
                        41
                        .,-I
                           100                                      2                                                   lo
                                                                     I I fit'      -I' f I 1-1 III           I I fill
                            lo,
                                                                         10                    100
                                                               Powder Weight, lbs.
                              Figure 9. Peak Intensities loduced by Typ0e III Photoflash Mixtures as a Function
                                        of Charge Weight

                                                                   it V,7aS        that tile light pulses fro@
                             -the plots of  iiiteiisity-vcr-us tinic
                             the "C" mi.,.tLirc, were in niolt cises of 'oiicrcr (ItirzLtion.  Based on the
                             total ii-itegratr-,d light olitput t2he "C" and "A" mi>,.tLtres were equally
                             effective.
                                         i.e.   C -- A > B   > D
                                    It could be concluded    that of the mixtures studied, the "A" and "C"
                             mixtures providc-d the most intense and total light oti+.put.  The "BI, and
                             "D" mixtures g7oneracted, sigi-lificantly,  less light in the visible spectrum.
                                                                     16

                        5     DISCUSSJO'.,\' 01'1-'OTEI,@Tl@'l@L rlltsl-l 1.,LINDT@ISS EFRECI'S
                              Several. important questions bacl to be answcrc,-d before these data
                        could be interpretc@d in terms of potential flzisli blindiess off,-.cts:
                              1.2  What is the level of flasl-i luminosity that will
                                   produce permanent eye injury?
                              2.   What is the level of flash luminosity that will
                                   produce. transient flash blincliiess?
                              3.   If the measure of the transient flash blindness is
                                   expressed in terms of functional requirements
                            2       calling for viewing and resolution of specific
                                   objects, how does the luminosity of the objects
                                   to be viewed bythe observer affect recovery
                                   time from non-injurious flash blindness?
                        S. 1  PERMANENT EYE DI@.MAGE
                              It has been reported that the threshold energy level for permanent
                        eye damage is between 02.2 and 1.6 cals/cm2.3-6
                              Zaret,3 expresses the requirements for permanent eye injury in terms
                        o'L the fraction of the photopigments which are bleached by the light flash.
                        This bleaching process involves the ph-otochemical transforma'tion of
                        11-monocis retinene to,trans-retinene. 'The 11-7monocis  retinene
                        complexes with th2e opsin enzymes to form the active photosensitive
                        pigments. Upon light 'excitation the 11-monocis olefin is transformed
                        to the more chemically stable trans isomer via an electronically or vibra-
                                              7-9          -retiziene, a yello,,,@,, pigment, which
                        tionally excited state.  - The trans'
                        is formed is not compatible w2ith the opsin enzyme and, thus, does not
                        form a photosensitive pigment.' Recovery of the bleached pigment is
                        dependent upon a chemical transformation back to the 11-monocis isomer
                        cc-talysed by retinene isomerizase.
                              The concentration of visual pigment only begins to bd significantly
                        affected by light intensities of the order of 105 troland-seconds*2 and
                        decreases rapidly with further increase in intensity. The concentration
                        of bleached pigment as a function of light intensity can be expressed as
                        follows'
                        *The troland is the unit of retinal illumination. It is equal to the
                        product of the lumiriance o' the object viewed in candles/(nicter)2 and
                        the area of th1e pupil in mrn2
                                                          17

    -lemon
                                    Cb /Co     1 - exp ('-.ay It)                            (2)
                         whcre
                                c                                           ure I
                                 b  is the concentration bicachcd at expos
                                c0   is the origiiial pigment concentreti on,
                                I t  is the retinal total irradia2nce in trolar;d-seconds, and
                                ay  is the photosensitivity expressed in (td-sec)-l
                           In the case of the human pigments the value of a, y is approximately
                           10-7 (td-sec)-l. Zaret estimates that as the fraction of pigment bleaching
                           approaches unity permanent retinal damage, occurs. Within the time frame
                           of the flashes which2 were produced in the experiments reported here, the
                                                                                        2 (4 x 1 01 td-sec)
                           threshold damage irradiances are approximately 0.4 cals/cm
                           and 1.6 cals/cm2 (1.6xlOlO td-sec)10-32 fcr,- exposures  of  I  and  100  msec,
                           respectively. According to Br2o,%,,@'n,' these irradiance levels must be delivered
                           at flux levels of at least 0.7 cals/CM2-sec or the rate of heat dissipation  in
                           the eye tissue will be sufficient to prevent an elevation or temperature to
                           the degree where thermal burn will occur.
                                At 5550 angstroms the wavelength of maximum'sensitivity to the eye,
              2             one watt of radiant energy corresponds-to 672. 1 lumens. Assuming that.all
                           of t@e light emitted from the pyrotechnic flash devices tested during the
                           program is at this wavelength, the light intensities required to affect
                           thermal damage to the retina would be 1. 75 and 6.99 x 104 lumen-sec/ft2
                           for exposures of I and 100 msec, resp2ectively. The above estimates
                           take into account the fact that the light received at the cornea is-intensified
                           when it arrives at the retina (i.e. , the imag-- size is reduced): Ham'
                           noted that an irradiance received at the cornea of a rabbit eye is intensi-
                           fied by a factor of 60 times when it reaches the retina.
                                 With respect to the experiments perfor2med in  this  investigation,  these
                           values are considered to be lo-,,v. ;issuming that the light emitted from the
                           flash units'have the same spectral characteristics as the sensor, than the
                           luminous efficiency of the light output is only 28 percent that of 5550 ang-
                           strom light.  The threshold light exposures would then be 6.26 x 104 and
                           2.48 x 105 lumen-sec/ft2 for exposures between 1 and 100 msec, respec-
                           tively.
                                 Based on the luminous intensity data, sho%,in in Table II   it can be
                           seen that the small photoflash charges (i.e.    the SS and SSDE series) are

                                                                                      cliarges
                          not czipcblc of dcliveriiig diimz,.cing light flishes.  The 1,-irger
                          (i.e. the S aii(i SD'i" series) czin produce permlinciit eye damage.  Further
                          discussions rcgarding the possibility of permanent  eye2  injury  are  presented
                          elsewhere in this re,,.)ort (see Section 5.3.2).
                          5.2  REC O@n7ll'Y TIME TO LIGI-ITrLAsi-irs
                               Before oiie can estimate the recovery period after light exposure it
                          is important that the important recovery measurci-nent conditions  be  defined.
                          Clearly,2 the intensity of the light which the observer is exposed to will
                          determine recovery time. An additional consideration is the illuminance
                          of the object which the observer needs to detect after exposure for func-
                          tional reasons.
                               A- review of the literature was made in  order  to  define  the.dependence
                          of recovery on the two factors noted above. The resul2ts of this search
                          and the subsequent analyses are shown in Figure 10.
                               5.2.1    Review of Flash Blindness Experiments
                               Metcalf and Horns     conducted flash blindness experiments using
                          the high intensity flashes from a  carbon  arc.  The  experiment  was  designed
                          to determine the effect of light exposures li'Al-lely to be encounter2ed during
                          nuclear operations. Each of the four subjects had their pupils dilz,,Lted
                          prior to exposure. A 6mm artificial pupil was used in order to maintain
                          constant pupil size. The sub ects  were  exposed  for  100  msec  to  illumina-
                                                      .j
                          tion ranging from 70 to 12, 000 lumens per square foot. Fo2llowing this
                          exposure, the subjects were required to detect the  flashing  of  a  17  minute
                          visual angle circular patch. The luminance of the test patch was  varied
                          between .07 and 71 foot-Lamberts. A summary of a complete set     of this
                          data at a flash luminosity- of 5'x lo5 iumen-sec/ft2 is shown in Figure 10.
                               The time require2d-to recover visual  sensitivity  following  exposure  to
                          high intensity, short duration adapting flashes also has  been  investi6ated
                          by Chisum and Hill.r-' , 14 Adapting flashes of 33 to 165'gsec and 9.8  msec
                                tion with luminances from lx 104 to 5x 108 lumens/ft2
                          in dura                                                2       were used.
                          Visual sensitivity was determined by the resolution of gratings requiring
                          acuities* of 0. 13 and 0. 33 at display luminances between approximately
                          .004 to 200 millilamberts.   The 0.33 acuity level requires the function  of
                          cones while the 0. 13 acuity level can be resolved by rod vision. The
                          light pulses used by Chisuni and H2ill which best represent the flashes
                          *Acuity is defined as the relative ability of the visual organ to resolve
                          detail.  It is usually expressed as the reciprocal of the, minimum angular
                          sepiration in minutes of two lines just resolvable as separate.
                                                   -Woo""

                                                                                                      Values Associated With Each
                                                                                                      Curve are in Units of
                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                      Lumens-sec/2ft
                 100
                                                                                                                               6, 14
                                                  5 x 1 0 5(2)                                        (1)  Chisum and     Hill
                                                                                                                                6, 13
                                                    2                                                  (2)  Metcalf and Horn
                 90                                                                                   (3)  Severin6
                 80                                              5 x 1 01 (1)                         The vertical dashes correspond to
                                                                                                      the four display lumina2nce levels
                                                                                                      shown in Table III.
                 70
                 60
                 50
              0
                 40
                                               4
                                        IXIO
                 30
                 20                             3
                                         5xlO      1)
           2                           3
                          89-lxlo
                 10                                                                                                            ..........
                            (1, 3)                                                                                                         
.........
                   0                                                                                      7 7 ri5--      7    -i- 7
                    10-2                           lo-'                          loo                            101                           
102
                                                                     Display Luminance, millilamberts (mL)

                           from the pyrotechnic devices tc-..qtcd (luring this program were selected "or
                           the comparisons made in Figure 10.  Also the data for the acuity level
                           0.33 v,,as uscd, since the effects to cone vision are the most critical to
                           this  study.  It  should  be  noted  that  recovery  from   ro2d   saturation   is   a   much
                           faster  process  than  recovery   from   cone   saturation.   The   latter   also   requires
                           more  energy  for   satitratioii.3
                                 It was observed    2that  the  recovery  time.-  for  the   light   illuminations   of
                           5  x  105  lumens-sec/ft  ,  reported  by  Metcalf  and  liom,   and   5   x   104   lumens-
  2                               2
                           sec/ft , reported by Chisum and Hill were almost identical.  This is not
                                                                                                 4           t.3
                           too surprising after one reviews the discussions by Brown  and Zare
                           Namely,  both  postulate  that  the   relation   between   the   energy   of   an   adapting
                        2   flash and recovery time for a specific visual task is similar in nature to
                           that sho-,.vn-in Figure 11.
                                                           100
                                                            80  -
                                                            60  -
                                                            40  -                              >
                                      2                     >20  -
                                                           0
                                                           a  0                 1 Reaction Time
                                                                  Log Adapting Flash Eriergy
                           Figure  11.     A   hypothetical   curve   illus-Lrating the    relation    between    energy
                                           of a blinding flash and time required2 for detection of infor-
                                           mation in a visual display.  The minimum detection time at
                                           low flash energy corresponds to visual reaction time.
                                           Detection time approaches infinity as flash energy approaches
                                           a value which will cause irreversible injury.
                           For very low    adapting  flash  energies  there  is  2very  littlet  if   any,   effegt   on
                           the visual capability, and recovery time is minimal. As energy is increased,
                           there is an increase in recovery time at an increasing rate.  The form of this
                           function depends on the nature of the visual task.  As the energy of the
                           adapting flash reaches a level wliich corresponds to a maximum possible
                           bleaching of the2 photosensitive pigments of the retina, the rate of increa-se
                           of  recovery  time  may  be   expected   to   decrease.   It   is   postulated   as   shonvn
                           in  Figure  11  that  recovery  time   may   actually   assume   a   constant   value   over
                           some range of adapting flash energies beyond that at'which maximum bleaching
                           occurs.
                           *Adaptii5ig flash energy usually refers to the total energy to VIliich the subject
                           is exposed and from -%vhich the subject must recover normal vision.

                                                                                                 t2
                             It api)czlrs tlizit the data o' Cliisuri Znd ljjll -It Sx 104 luircnc,-so /f
                       and 1\,Ietco-If and Ilorii at 5 x 105 lumcns-sr-,c/ft2 cz:ii be exple,,iiiccl by this
              2         quzilitt-,tive cirguiiient. Althougli there are some differences between the
                       individual experiments, the very close co.-relation in measured recovery
                       times, together with the fact that the saturated bleach levels are being
                       approached or perhaps' exc-eeded@n both, indicate that the intensity p2la-
                                                 4.              sec/ft2.
                       tea u is in the rL, iige of 1 0 ' to 1 0  lumen-
                             The data reported by Chisuin and Hill at the illumination level of
                       1 x 103 ltimen-sec/ft2 was extended as shown in Figure  10  using  data
                       reported by Severin."  Severin reported re2sults in which the display
                       luminance of test patches were between 0.06 and 0.013 foot- amberts.
                       The results obtained ,-t an adapting flash intensity of 8. 9 x 10  lumen-
                       sec/ft2, very close to I x 103 lui-nen-sec/ft 2, were used to extend the
                       Phisum and Hill data.  One reservation about Severin's data is that the
                       duration o2f the adapting fla.shes was 150 msec. This is slightly greater
                       than the normal blink tifne of 100 msec.  Nonetheless,  Severin's  data
                       does appear to agree with the general trend at high display luminances
                       found by Chisum and Hill.
                             5.2.2    Additional Observations'
                                                                    4 to
                        2     An experiment was performed by Brown        determine the dependence
                       of recovery time from flash blindness on the luminance of objects viewed.
                       The test subjects were exposed to' light intensities of 3 x 10-2 to 3 x 102
                       ft-lamberts for durations-of 0.9 seconds. The display consisted of a  -
                       grating pattern and observers were req@iired to identify its orientation. A -
                   2    timer was started and the grating was illuminated with presentation of the
                       flash. As soon as the grating orientation was  defected,  the  observer
                       depressed a switch that turned off the timer. Detection times were recorded
                       only for correct identification of grating orientation.
                             The results of this study are reproduced in Figure .12. The families
                       of curves in the upper part of t2he figure represent results with a grating,
                       the individual lines of which subtended a vis@ial angle of 3.8 min.
                       According to Brown, the detection of the orientation of this target display
                       depended on cone vision. The curves in the lower two graphs were obtained
                      'for a grat-.:Lng which represented a visual angle of 12.5 min. Rods may serve
                       in detection of the orienta2tion of this coarser grid.
                             It is clearly shown, again', that recovery times are dependent on the
                       luminance of the object which the eye attempts to detect. There is   one
                       major uncertainty, regarding the quantitative nature of Brown's data, hoiv-
                       ever. This experiment wis performed by exposing the test subjects to a
                       0. 9 sec light pulse duration.  Si7nce the blink time is of the order of 0. 1
                       soc it is zcjssible that the observers viere not exposed to the full d'uration
                                                          22

                                                                                                        L-Y,
                                                                                  Vistiai i-,@-cui'  -.,@ 0.26
                                            60  -                                                             60
                                                                             5.0
                           2                 so -                             4  5 lo; ti-L                    so-
                                                                             4  0 log lt-L
                                       t)                                  a  3.5 lol fl-L
                                       0                                   o   30 log 1,-L                    40
                                     2       40                             0 2    leg fl-L
                                            30                                                                30-
                                       4J
                                       0
                                       -4                                                                     20 -
                                       4a   20
                                                             2                                                 10 -
                                            I  o
                                                                                                              0
                                               0
                                                                                                              -2.5                   0.5       
2.5
                                               -2.5 2         -0. 5  0.  5             2.5
                                                                                  Log Display. Luminance
                                                                                     Visual      Acuity           0   08
                                               6 0                                                            6 0
                                                                         2                                     5 0
                                               5 0
                                                                                                              40 -
                                               40
                                         ,n
                                                                                                              30 -
                                               3 0
                     2                                                                                         20
                                         c     20
                                         0
                                                                                                              10
                                         0     1 0
                                                                                                                  0
                   2                              0 r
                                                 -2.5                      0.5           2.5                      -2.5                  0.5    
2.5
                                                                                     Log Display Luminance
                                       Figure  12.               Relations of Perception Timp- to Log Display Luminance
                                               3                  (ft-L) for Each of 6 Adapting Flash Luminances4
                                                                                                              23

                   of the light pulse. Tlicrcfurc thcrc is an iii-icertai,lity in the total exposure
                   duration of cacli subjcct to tl-ie light. Thcrofore tliesc dati were not used
                   to correlate results obtaiiied -in the prc-scnt study.
                   5.3  INTI:RPRI-:TATIONorRESULTS
                        The me2-2surcd light iiitensities and durations were interpreted in terms
                   of possible irreversible and revcrsi))Ie eye effects.
                        5.3.1   Illiimination of Photo'Llish
                        The experimentally measured illuminance of each pyrotechnic test
                   device as reported in Table II wzls estimated as a function of distance from
                   the flash origin using the inverse square l2aw. These estimates are shown
                   in Figures 13 and 14, The expected illuminance which observers would
                   received from exposure to;@ G.E. No. 50 flash bulb ar(; also shown in these
                   figures. The value for the total output of this -flash bulb, 1 x 105 lumen-
                   sec/ft2, was obtained from General Electric specifications.
                        5.3..2  Estimated Eye Effects
      2                  Some of the iso-illuminance curves shoivn in Figure 11 were extra-
                   polated to a d'splay illuminance level of 0. 1 millilamberts (or 0. 093
                   lumens/ft2). The recovery time for each of the reported ada-oting flash
                   energies shoan in Figure 11 were estimated for each of.four display lumi-
                   nances; 0. 1, 0. 2, 0.5 and 1. 0 m2illilamberts. These estimates are tabu-
                   lated in Table 111.
                       TABLE III.  ESTIMATED P,.t,'@C;OVERY TIMES AS A FUNCTION OF
                                  ADA@TIN G LIGHT ENERGY AND TARGET DISPLAY
                                  LUMINANCE
                   Adapting Flash Energy               -Recovery Time (sec)
                    (lumen-sec/ft2)                      Target Luminance
      2                                                    (millilamberts)
                                                  0.1       0.2     0.5      1.0
                         s x los
                                                  82        55      35        26
                   1 x 104                        47.       31      18        @12
                   5 x 103                        24        17      12         9
        7           .9 -  I x 103                  8_         5        4        3
                                                  24

                                  Curves iclenticil for SD tind SDED
                                                                                                   A, C,
                                  S and SDE refer to the type of pliotoflash cartricige used.       B  J
                                  A, D, C and D refer to the pyrotechnic mixture used
                         106        (see Table 1).
                   2                                                                                 A
                                                                                                    C;
                                                                                                    B
                                                                                                    D
                           5
                         10
                     C,4
   2                   4-A
                           4
                         1 0
                                                                          4
                            3
                         I 0
                            2 Lj
                          10
                               3                     2                     101                   100
                             10                    130
                                                Saparation Distance,  ft.
                              Figure 13.  Light Illumination From Type S and SDE Photoflash

                          5
                        10
                                 SS ar-ci OOSDE refcr to the photo'Llzlsh c,-irtridg@-, used.                 A
                                 At B, C aiicl D rr-,fcr to the pyroteclinic mi>,ture used
                                   (see Table 1).
                                                                                 2                             B,D
                                                                                                              c
                          4
                       10                                                                                     A     s
                                                                                                              B, D
                    4-2
                          3
              2         10
                   fA4
                         2
                       10
                                                                     4
                       10
                          10 3                         2                        101                           0
                                                     1 0                                                   I  0
                      4                            Separation Distc-ince, ft.

                    Tlicsc cs'Liiiiz@tcs -ire clso iiidico.L(-,cl. by the vcrticz',l dashes crussing eacli
                    of the curx;cs iii FigLirc 1 1
                         For eacli pyrotochiiic dovice tested, the recovery times for a stibjc-ct
                                       -isli were estima2ted using the data iii Figures 11, 13,
                    c>.poscd to the light fl,
                    and 14 and Tcible III. These estimatcs were made as a functibn o'L distance
                    away from the flash and the luriiinaiice lovelz of objects which the observer
                    might attciiipt to detect after exposure. These estimates are reported in
                    Figures 215 and 16.
                         As expected the large photoflash devices (i.e'. , the S and SDE series)
                    should be the most effective as far as separation distance is concerned.
                    An obsc,,-rver separated from the flash by 50 feet can be affected if an SA
                    charge is employed. At separation distances less than 7 feet there would
                    be the possibility that irreversible e2ye damage could be affected using the
                    SA charge. Significant flash blindness effects are exp8cted within this
                    distance range for all oi the charges. Recovery times of as long as 60
                    seconds are predicted for the detection of objects which are very dimly
                    illuminated.
                         The effects of exposure to a G.E. 50, flasl-i bulb were also 2predicted.,
                    It can b@- seen that the estimated effects are not as great as for the S and
                    SDE ser-i-es photoflash units. By further comparison with a recent report
                    by Tiller et al. Ir' (ARPA Contract DAAK02-69-C-0338) the estimates made
                    for the G.E. 50 flash bulb appear to be reasonable. Tiller et al. evaluated
                    'the effects of exposure to this flash b2ulb to subjects performing mili'Lary
                    tasks. The subjects were exposed to a flash at distances between 6 and
                    19 feet. After exposure the subjects were required to detect ground
                    emplaced  m'ines or detect and fire upon a test target. All of these tests
                    were performed under ;@,arious night time conditions to which the subjects'
                    had adapted before being exposed to -the light flash. It was 2found that the
                    subjects, all trained Marines, were able to resume their assigned task
                    with the sanie efficiency after an average recovery time of 5 to 20 seconds.
                    No indication of reflected luminances of the objects detected were made.
                    It is felt, however, that the predictions of recovery times for dimly lit
                    displays (viz., 0. 1 and 0. 2 millilamberts) agree with the results obta2ined
                    by Tiller et al. Between 6 and 10 feet it is predicted that'exposure to the
                    G.E. 50 flash should take approximately 8 to 18 seconds. No predictions
                    beyond 10 feet for the G.E. 50 were made because of lack of data. How-
                    ever there is much indication to suggest that at longer distances (i.e. ,
                    lower flash energies) the recovery times versus distance dec4reases at a
                    very small rate.
                                                   27

              Target Display
              Luminance (mL)
               62
            90
                  3    26                                    Expected iye Damage (ie. at distances
            80
                                                              corresponding to the intercepts of the
                                                                             rve)
            70                                                arrow and each.cu
      2                                                               S and SDE refer to photoflash
            60                                                       cartridge design.
                                                                     A, B,C and D refer to pyrot'echnic
            50                                                       mixture used @see Table 7).
        >1      31 18  12
                                      'Po
        :>
        0   40
        IY.
            30-
                17  12  9
            20
            10-
                5  .4   3                                                     D, B,C A          D, C, k
                                                                                (PDE)             S
                                                     6   7  8 9 10                       0    4 0  50
               3              2        3     4    5                             2 0
                                               Senaration T)Istcinc,-e. ft.

                                The estiinated  re.covory tiiiies after exposure to the smaller photo-
                          flasli sources Lire sho,,vn in Figure 16. It is not ariticipatc-.-d that eye
                          damage could be if'Lectcd by those charges even at short separation
                          distances. Again the "I%." and 'IC" iii@l>.tures are expected 9to be the most
                          efficient.
                                                                29
                                                                            --MINN   p       ------

      Target Display                                          S and SDI"-' refer to photoflash
      Luminance (ML)                                          cartridge design.
         2 .5 1  .1                                           A,B,C and D refer to pyrotechnic
                                                              mixture used (see Table 1).
               '6
         5 3  2
                 80 -     Expected Eye Damage
              2   70
       tn
                 60
       ci        50
       0 31 18 12
                 40
                 30
         17 -12 9-
                 20
                 10                 .......
         5  4 3
                                                      Ss
                  0                             I           I                  ----       I
                   0           2                3           4         5  2     6     7
                                            Separation Distance, ft.

                     6.    CONCJITSIONS
                           Sixteen pyroteclinic fl,.isli mixtures fragmenting container combinations
                     were tested'.  It was shown th:it sigiiificant fl,--isli blindness effects can be
                     expected to result from the exl)osure to these flashes, all o'L wliich occur
                     within 50 mscc.  These eff2ects can result by exposure to these charges at
                     distances within a raiige of 50 feet depending on the  pyrotechnic  mixture
                     and qtiantity, container design, and method of initiation.
                     6. 1  CARTRIDGE DESIGN
                           The series S and SDE charges (i.e., the 2.7 in. photoflash cartridge)
                     produced the most intense light and are expected to be effectiv2e at distances
                     as far as 50 feet. The external explosive burster attached to the outside of
                     the "S" cartridge was expected to increase the light intensity by compacting
                     the mix before ignition., However, for the larger cartridge this  does  not
                     appear to have been successful. For the smaller 0.83 in. photoflash cart-
                     ridge the expected trend resulted. The effective compaction by this. i2mplod-
                     ing mechanism probably  increases  with  decreasing  cross-sectional  area.
                     6.2  PHOTOFIASH MIXTURE
                           The type "A" and "C" mixtures in all cases generated the most light
                     output. In some cases the "C" mixture produced  light  pulses  of  longer
                     duratioli as previously anticipated. . The "B" and "D" mixtures were  not
                     as e2ffective. In fact the performance of the  "D"  mixture  was  relatively
                     poor.
                     6.3  DATA INTERPRETATIONS
                           In order to estimate. the flash blindness effects, correlations between
                     reported data had to be made. The results of the analyses  appear  to  be
                     consisteiit with expectation, namely that recovery time  is  dependent  not
                     only on the flash energy but also o2n the luminance of objects  which  are
                     visually sought during the recovery period. Also  the  relatively  insensi-
                     tive change of recovery time at flash energies which produce 90 to 100
                     percent pigment bleach was shown in this analysis.
                           It is useful to note that the large light sources used in our experiments
                     (i.e. , the S and SDE series) , prodticed more irtei-ise illumination than the
                     source employed by the Vertex Corporation. Correspondingly, longer
                     incapacitation times are predicted for the S and SDE  photoflash  units  as
                     cornpared with the G.&. 50 photoflash used in the Vertex studies. In
                     additioti, on the basis of our independent experimental data, we could
                     predict the shorter incapacitation times reported by Vertex6 for their weaker
                     light source.
                                                         31

                                                REFER,ENCES
                      2.    Engi icerinq Design Hrincli)ool,                    series
                            "Part One Theory and. Application" Al,,IC; pampILt AIVCP 706-185
                            (Apr. 19 67).
                      3 .   M. M. Zaret and G. M. Grosaf, "Visual and Retinal Effects of
                      2      Exposure to High Intensity Light Sources" in AC.,AT-ZD Conference
                            Proceedings No. 11 Loss of Vision From Hiqh IiitensitY Light
                                  J.                                            -
                            NATO (Mar. 1966).
                      4.    J. L.- BroNvn, "Experimental Investigations of Flash Blindness",
                            Human Factors (Oct. 1964) p2. 503.
                      5.    D. W. DeMott and T.  P. Davis,  "Irradiance Thresholds for
                            Chlorioretinal Lesions", A.M.A. Arch. Ophthalmol. 62, 653 (1959).
                      6.    J. F. Parker, "Visual Impairment From Exposure To High Intensity
                            Light Sources", Bio Technology Inc. Report 63-2, Contract Nonr-
                            4022(00), (May 1963).
                      7.      E.2 Borges, "A Review of the Visual Process - A Literature Survey",
                            Technology Inc. (1964).
                      B.    R. Hubbard and A. Kropf, "Molecular Isomers In Vision',., Scientific
                            America qan. 1967) p. 64.
                      9.    N. Turro, "Molecular Photochemistry," Banjamin, New York (1967).
                      lo.   W. S. H. Rushton, "Dark-Adaptation and the Regeneration of Rhodo.psin2"
                            J. Physiol. 156, 166 (1961).
                      ii.   R. S. Weale, "Vision and Fundus Reflectiometry: A Review", Photo-
                            chem and Photobio. 4, 67 (1965).
                      12.   H. J. A. Dartnal, The Vistial Pigment  Methuen and Co., Londori:
                            (1957).
                      13.   R. D. Metcalf and R. E. Horn, "Visual Recovery Times From High
   2                         Intensity Flashes of Light", WAD(@; Tech. Report 58-232 (Oct. 1958).
                      14.   J. H. Hill and G. T. Chisum, "Flash Blindness Protection," Aero-
                            space Med. 13
                                          _,958 (1962).
                      is.   R. E. Tiller, R.' W. Garrett and J. H. Cronander, "Selectivity
                            Induced Degradation of Scotopic Vision", Vertex Corp. Repo,-t,
                            ARPA 11--lontract DAAI,'02-69-C-0338 (June 1969).

                                 In order to clarify the question of potential zippliczitiois of b,-ight
                        light sources, a series of simple  scenarios  have  been  developed,  wliich
                        illustrate possible suitable situ,.-itions.
                                 The use of a detonating pyrotechnic'permits the generation of
                        casing frac-nion's as well as intense l2ight, if the material is enclosed  in
                        a metal casing. On the other hand,  packing  the  pyrotechnic  into  a  non-
                        metallic (e.g. , cardboard) casing, essentially eliminates any significant
                        fragment hazard. These two modes  of  operation  find  separate  regimes  of
                        possible application.
                                 PERIhiETER D@T-"FENSE
                   2              Given a situation in which a village or a group of men wish to
                        provide a very distinct indication of an attempt aL. perimeter  penetration,
                        by the enemy, and in addition wish to either inflict temporary optical
                        incapacitation alone, permanent optical incapacitation alone, or fragment
                        damage in addi-tion to the optical incapacitation, these pyrotechn,.c  light
       2                 sources can play a useful role.
                                 Thiis, cased in metal and triggered by sensors (or trip wires)'
                        within the effective fragment range, they  provide  direct  fragment  damage
                        cap-abilityv!ith a good possibility of severe permanent optical impairment
                        at such relatively short ranges.
                                 Triggered by sensors deployed outside the effective f2ragment
                        range, the effects would be primarily tdmporary optical incapacitation
                        and disorientation with a low probability of fragment damage.
                                 In specific situations, calling for no fragmentation effects, such
                        as one in which friendly personnel may inadvertantly trigger the charge,
                        the sensors can be deployed far enough away to assure only temporary
                        op2tical incap-mcitation and fragmentation can be completely eliminated with
                        a cardboard casing for the pyrotechnic,
                        II.      VEHICLE PROTECTION AGAINST KIDNAP ATTEMPT
                                 Given the premise that abductors (e.g. , of South American diplo-
                        matic representatives) do not wish to kill the hostage during the kidnap
                        attempt, a system for providing even 5 - 10  seconds  of2  optical  incapaci-
                        tation in a 3600 field around the car in which the hostage is driving,
                        provides an opportunity for escape, while the abductors are optically dis-
                        oriented.  This system would be more effective at night than in the day-
                        time. The light source could be either pyrotethnic  or  electric  discharge.
                        It could be made safe against accidental discharge causing permane7nt
                        damage to innocent bystanders.
                                                             33

                                                  DTSRIJFR!ON C).r           CONVOY IIY
                                      CAU,@)11-.T'--.. Ol'TICliL liNTC-,A.'-'AC!Ti'@TIOI\l OF I,T--'AD DIIIARLR-
                                      The scciiario licrc Is relatively simple In that 2the Icad  driver
                            can be optically lncap,-icit,-ttcd as lie's rotin,lling a turn, or causcd to block
                            the road by his inability to see it for a sufficient time to cause a wreck.
                            IV.       ESCAPE FROLI AN ENCLOSUPE WITI-I NO PB-RMANENT
                                      DAIvIA'-IF, TO OTIlrRS
   2                                   In some situations, where the presence of innocent bystanders,
                            e.g. women and children prevents the use of more damaging techniques,
                            the use of temporary optical incapacitation is of potential interest.
                                                        IIIT
                            V.        PRELIMINARY TO__ AI;DIVIDUAL CAPTU,t)%E
                                      Whe2re a single individual is to be captured  alive,  the  use  of
                            optical incapacitation  may  provide  useful  assistance.  Thus,  a  bright
                            light source generated n ear him by impact functioning of a device fired
                            from a shotgun can  provide  sufficient  temporary  optical  incapacitation
                            to permit other capture techniques to be em@l:oyed more reliably.
                           2 VI.       STJMMP.RY
                                      While these scenarios do not provide  a  complete  list  of  pote
                            tial applications, they should be useful in examining the value of a s ;tem
                            which combines the capability for fragmentation damage, severe pernianent
                            optical incapacitation and transient optical incapacitation with.the choice
                            fairly easy to control.
1
                                                                  34

