                    EFFECTS  OF ACUTE  AD&IINISTRATION OF   BAS IN &AN
                  BAS  tl-Benzyf-2-methyl-5-methoxy    tryptamine') was
             synthesized  by D.  W. tlooley of the  Rockef e I ler'  Institute.
             He found  that lt@  was an effective  an.ti-serotonin when
             tested against  carotid artery rings In vitro.      He also
             found that BAS 2 blocked  the  blood   pressure   elevation
             resul-fing from Intravenous  administration  of   LSD   in  dogs.
             Wilk.Ins,, In Boston, studied the effects of BAS as an
             antlhypertensive  agent.  He  found  that  It  did   cause
             $19wificanf  reduction  In  blood,pressure   of   hypertensives,
             and that, when admin-istered. chronically In doses ranging
2             between 40-160 mg. daily (total dose), It Induced effects.
             resembling those caused by reserptne ('intolerable' sedation,
             snuffy   no se, gastrointestinal symptomso etce)o
                  Our experiments were carried out In order to study
             the effects of  an  acute  or  subacute  administration  of  BAS
             In human subjects, and were preliminary to experime2nts
             tn which the substance would be used In an effort to block
             the LSD reaction (see other    report).
                  Subjec-fs   used were all former-morphlne    addi-cfs who
             h,,ad been    withdrawn fr,--,m opiates and had been abstinent
             from  that  drug  for a period of at least three months.     All
             were Negroes ranging In age from 21-40 years.  All were In
  1           an  excellent   state of physical health, and none had any
             c vidence of a ma jor osychos Is
                                                                                     @70

                                                              ge
                  SAS was administered orally.      Single     dosese.ranging
            between  5-400 mg. which were    Increased gradually in
            step-wise fashion between experiments,      caused no significant
            effects, during the first 8 hours after     administration,.
            However., after the  higher  doses patients bega             port
                                    2                           n to re
            the development of   effects  occurring 12-16 hours after
            taking  the drug.  These effects Included dizziness, feelings
            of fatigue,. nausea$ and   diarrhea.  The observation sch
                                                                         edule
            was accordingly changed    and patients were studied from the
            12th fo the 20th hour after oral admin2istration of 400 mg.
            of the drug.  llb significant effects on temperatures pulse,
            respiratory rate,   restinq  blood  pressure,  puptilary   size.,
            or kneelerks were   observed   atthough  many  of  the  pat.ients
            did report fatigue., mental depression, and nausea.
                 Effects of repeated administration of doses of ISO-
            200 m                           u2qs wer,e  !given  at  eight-hour
                   were then studied.     Dr'
            Intervals.  No objective effects and no subjective reports
            occurred afl.-er the first two  doses.  After the fhird dose,
            however,           began to report weakness,. fatigue.,
            @dizziness., mental dullness, nausea,.and diarrhea.  These
            effects persisted  for two to'fhree days 'after fhe d5rug was
            discontinued.  No  objective changes were observed on
            pupillary size  reflexes, resting blood pressure, temperature,
            pulse, or respiratory rate.

               Discussion.   In large dO3CS-, SAS lndu-ces marked
          subjective effects without any great  objective change*
          tt Is not clear how these effects are  produced; they could
          e'lther be central or peripheral.  It should be noted,
          however, that althougs BAS is a  powerful anfi-serotonin
          (as Ts LSD) no symptoms resembling those  seen after LSD
          were.6bserved.

