                        SU13JECT:     til(TICIIUYZ Team As3igiurent
                        REFr,]IZIICE:  AIITICIIOKE  lieriorandum  of 26 flovcml.@,-r 1953.
                        CiL@ti];R.AL STATT,',Iiri!T
                             'In accordance.witli basic     AItTlCliOKE memorandum dated      26 Zio-
                        ..vember,195; and in accordance     with   policy approved by       all rernbers
                        of the AIZTICIIOKR-, Conference                        an   AIZTICIIOKE Te-,Pi
                        is to be nsnigned t                                         n or  ab,,iit
                        1  Jsnusr-y  1954.
                              The  AIZTICIIOKE Tenm      herainaftnr   f (-,rrr-,d to r-I ol,he. T(-r@;;i
                                    A.   Offor  oper,,ltional SILPPOrt t--
                                                                                in, the
                                                and a     2     ield.Stations.
                                         handling of specific      cases usizig:ARTICIIOKIIJ
                                         methods and techniques.
                                   B.'  Conduct research and ex-inerimeiit@ition along
                                        All'rICIIOKI-j linl-.s uointr avoilfible  rubject3  ond
                                        niaterial) both fraiii an offenolve t,.nl
                                        Vi(-W pol.rit.
                          .,.The     Team will. consist,.of                            lio wi I Ibe
                                                                           p,tectinician.     In
                        4,,charge, 0 a@d',
                @7

fA'
                                                                                   or c,
                                                                         'f wit
                    of. s@x, months (or  less) oa TDY to    work jointl,                    ron
                    AIITICIIOKE problems   and research.
                                                      AIVI'ICI[OK't,'
                 2         The-Team will carry out ARTIC110i'%E opoi-stioni in uccorde-nen
it2
                   -with Instructions     and'directions as    to.tachniques    and methods
                                               hanters litarliine,,ton with full allowances
                     as proscribed b.-,,- licadq
                           for                3-1 nfr        @iold anti wi
                     rlLicIF,   probleim ari.       in ttie r             tli suf f'icient,
                     2.attitudo  given  to   lyermit a flexible and iiitelligpnt ol)crittion.
                           :Ilie Team will for all administrative iv,-tters and,for,
                     operational    control,Lo.,atta2ched.to,ttic   Office   of the Chief of
                                                                                 ")ncj wl.11
                      dii,,c-ctly                  rosponsililr:,                   The TcDr@-,
                      will function only upon      consent o                 or   his   repro
                      sentative.       FurtliLrnore, no operational  worlt or  research  will
                      I)a carried  out @jitliout exact  consent or   autlior,i-.zition 1'rom tilo..
                      Chief  of  Itission or. his  Deputy or  otherwise designated rc3l-cnsible
                       officer.:,@No  operational work or     research will be carried atit
                       without  e@mc2t cons^-nt   or ourhorizati.oii of the Glii,3f cf
                       of li-Is Del@uty or otlirr desit;natcd roopotisibl.@!  ofl'icf,,r.  If
                       in cc@nt,crii)ltit.,-.d outslde o       r tluwrrill, It ',4111 L)C
                                                    jaw
7                  1+   the rr-,3;@on,3i:l@iJ.ity of Llic Glii,?f of 'Ot-cur'Li,.-y,         to
                       arrange    upon the arrival of    the Team I              ffice    and
                       0 'rating   areas and atorags equil-ment'space      for Tcam   raterial

                                                                   for Tc,.i!i        tC?
                      SUI)Plico..-
                                                                       ,I'ICIIUKE work
                   formallv,brief &11 fleadquarters  u@ftces in  the Al'
       IL
                   where tlieir.duties will require  l@2nowledge of  or.use  of   the
                                                                                  If  (o I,
                   ART1611OKE toohniqueq.  Rtrtli,@@rroret               1 1 h i
                          a mmber of Itis StEiff') talte the Tc-Lnr,, me,-nber.,3 to aAi
                   ascif,,n
                  2 stations wi-thin th        reas for the Ifurpose of briefing each
                   .G&4
                       station,chief-and' ortain.of    hin associates on the'ARTICIIOKE,;
                   teelini(lues requirementsp.etc.
                         I:Iio Team.will peopi@4 submit.repo@t3,,(in writ2ing)..gf all
          ......   'Operational..sup@ort.cases-Itandled,and.of all-re3etircii    and
                        rirontation conducte(3.  Caso reports will include     in specific
                     %T..o
                    detail tlio technJ.,juc,,i, riethod,3t etc, tiof-,cl) chc,-,.ic2als,
                    results (infornation obtained)p etc,  Those reports will be sub-
                   -?rlt e   o                                        cretifter  to
                       t                        will  be forwarded  th
                    Ileadquorters Wi3sliington through prol)cr cli,.nnelo.  Special report
                                                        to 2insure uniform refor@ing,
                    fo@    .@ill.be ful-nislied the Team,
                    statistics,   ctc4
                                  Bai3ically# the report will conoist   of i @-io r,-,-i j. ri
                                  sectj ozis .The fir-3t will f@i,ic u nerli Uivr3 des-
                               2   (,ril,,tion of ttir- cE,@@-e in N;:;@44 full clt-t,-il %4itii
                                                              11 be a clinlc.,.l i-c@I)or-L
                                  r&.,,ult..,; !nd the r3pcr-ild wi
                                  stating in specific detail tiio   vo-ricus 7 items

                                 siicli r3o tirlo
                                 condition,  aLc
                          team supplic3 will lie of    two types:  A) tecliiiicql ni@(i li)
                     medical.-  Technical  elea-trorlicj mechanical find pliotogr8phi
                   .:Supplied,will'I@e obtained at licadquarteri3 Wasliington and for
                                       t*oillff'..thro"u'a"h 'I)roper cheintiels (air 1)
                     wr-r-ded (liree ly                                            ouch).
                   .Specific   Items of noce:3sctry tgqlinicr2-1 t-(IilJ.print will, bn dt-Itr-,i--.iitic(l
                     by Team members with tlic,,advice and assistance,of
                                               .@@aff..  l@tedical supplies will   be obtaine(I
                              of Headquarters
                                                                       n
                     in tli2e,field,locally.througl                   co'nectione .."T.,ccial
                     rnedical sul,plips (iliclu(Iinfr, uniisual cliinical,31 ntc.) wil-1 1-,c
                     obtaine(I tlirou,,Ph the l,leclical Officr,,, li(-adqiiarl,r!r3 ",4-Islii.nflton
                     and either hand   carried to   tho ficld  by riipribers, If this can  be
                     arranfed;  or  shipped  via  air pouch.
   t4

                                                               1) RAY T
           MEMORA.NDUM FOR:  A-ELTIC1401C.E      C;QlviMITTE:E
                 It is rdcommended that the following form and content be 4ccepted
           and approved as  being the Aims and Responsibilities in the ARticl-ic)KE
           program#.
                 21, The Director of Security &hall be responsible for the ARTICIJOKE
 ti
           program
                 2  The aims  of the ARTICHOICE prolram are as   follows:
                   a.'' To perfect techniques utilizing existing drugs, hypnosis, and
                other elements for the extraction of information from individuals
                whether willing or not.
                   b.  To ex lore means  through reaearch  indoctrinat2ion and training
                            p
                for preventi@ig the enemy from gaining control over the activities and
              ..,.mental caparities, of Agency per.s
                                                 oaael
                   C., When necessary glad cons i&tgnt. with'Agency policy and. operational
                 security, sup ort CIA operatiot%s through the use of ARTICHCjKv,'.tech7@
                 niques.
                 3.  The follo-wing responsibilittea and functions will apply to the
             ARTICIIOKE program:
                    a.  The Director of Security wUl be responsible for the gelieral di-
                 rection, administration and execution of the AILTICHOKZ aims as de-
                 fine4,. in 2. a-,0la and: -tk llbove

                                                aim
                  b.  The Director of Security @ill provide field teams  for  testing,
               experimenting and refining techniques  utilizing  currently  known  and
               recoc=ended new materials  for  the.  extraction  of  information  from
               indigenous personnel under field coaditions.
                  c . The Director of Security wiU arrange, in c,oordinati-en Nvith
2,J                   nd the Medical Staff, for  research  and  experimentation  within
               the facuities@of thoa.d.,two compon uts.for the doielopment of meanls.'
               for the control of the activities and mental capacities of  individuals
               whether willing or not.
                   d. ..Th@ Director of Security will conduct liaison and research In
              2   iolds and areas not within the immediate capabilities oelwand the
' ,St@
                Medical Staff for the development of ideas  and poiisible means of
                exerting control over the activities and mental capacities of indivi-
                duals.
                    a. The  Director of Security will control the operational use  o
                                                                         vnt to all.op-
                AItTICIiO.I=, techniques and serve   as the support elem
                crational components, in the use of  such techniques.
                            Director of Securitf will serv           oordinating element
                     i. The                                e as the c
                 among all components for the Agency on those matters concerning the
                 operational uze of ARTICHOKE tec8hniques.
                    9.  The Dire.@.tor of Security will arrange for the exchange of In-
                 formation concerning ARTICHOKE techniques and research and de -
                                          elements  primarily concerned as OSI
                 valopment &=on& those
                 Medical Division,          tLd S ecur ity Off Ica.

                           P4
                           44
                                 4u
            14
                     0           04
            to
            lu
            r.
            0
            :;4.
                                  14
                             gi
                               4A
            0    be
                              14
            614
                      0
            V         Cie      44
                 E
                 0
                 14
                         77

                               Ala
                Dfi
                l,fEl,iORANDrJ,v, TO: ARTICHOKE Repr--sentiti,tes
                FROM          :  Director of Security
                SUBJECT       : 'ARTICHOKE; Restatement of Program
                     1.  Reference ia made to memorandum dited 26 Noveinber 1152 addressed
                to AD/OSI; Clii4f, Medical Staff; 2and Chief   4werom     Security      Officer,
                CIA, subject "Project ARTICHOKF,."
                     2.  In accordance with (tiscussions at the July and AiiEu3t AFTTICHOKE
                meetings, it is felt that a    restatement of the -ilms of ARTICliC)KT,, is
                essential at this time, together with a re-definition of the functions of
                the ARTICHOKE, participants.  Also2 included in t)iis restatement will be
                certain  additions  to  orincivles  stated  in   above-mpntioned   memorandu-n.
                that have been agreed on in meetings of ARTICTIOKT,, representatives diii-inf7,
                the past several months:
                      3.  Aims:
                      a*    Perfect techniques utilizing    existing drugs, hypnosis and other
                            elements  for 2 the  extraction  of  information  from   individuals
                            whether willing or not.
                      b.    Provide ft!.- field teartis for testing, experimenting -jnd rcfinine
                            techniques utilizing currently kno,,m rtrid rec(-,nin(iided new
                            initerials foi- the extraction of Information from  itidii-,erioiis
                            personnel uiirter field con(iitions.
                       c.   In cooi"rtin;3tioil ,iit,h   ri the          'D't,,tff ,irt-@inv,(- for
                            research  ind  experimentation  within  the  facilities  of   these
                            two components for ttie developaient,  of  means  for  the  6control
                            of the actiyities and mental canacities of individuals whether
                            willing or not.

                   d.  Conduct liaison and iiiitit] i-r@seirch iii fields ind areas noL
                                                                                         I (I
                         within the immediate ctabil-itips o      and the liedic,%l Staff
                         for the development of ideas and possible means of exerting
                         control over the activities and2 mental caracities o@ individuals.
                   e.    Controlthe operational use of Al,,TICIiOn technioues @Lrid serve
                         as the sunport element to the operational components in the
                         use of such techniques.
                   f.    Explore means throu@h indoctrination and training of lireventing
                         the enemy from gaining control over the activities and mental
             2            capacities of Agency persotinel.
                   g.    Serve as the coordinating element, amonr all ccmponents for the
                         Agenc@r on those matters concerning the operational use of AF-,TICIfOl@.E
                         techniques.
                    h.   ArranFe for the exchange of infornation conceminr, AF-,TICHO?,E
                      2   techniques and research and devel.opment amonr, those elements
                         primarily concerned, as OSI       Iledical DivisionT
                         Security Office.
                    i.   C@nduct authorized liaison with other components  of Fovernment
                         in the ARTICHOK'E field, and arrange for liaison responsibility
                         through the krency component havinp,. til2e Most pertinent inter,@st
                         in new projects or activities in other departments havirip, beariiig
                         on the overall ARTICIIOKE@ project.
                    4.   P'unctions:
                    a.   The Chief  @ledical Staff, should be responsible for medical research
                         in suvnort of this project which shall conslt of resea9rch of a

                          bisic and operational nature determined by CiiiftC, !,Ir-dical
                          Staff, as appropriate and  necessary  within  the  scope  of  his
                          facilities in  support  of  this  project.  In  addition,  Chief,
                          liedical Staff, will conduct research and furiiisli onerational
                          support in re2sponse to requests by the Security Office and
                          within the limits of facilities available to the @tedical Staff.
                          Re(luests by the Secutity Office-will consist of specific
                          elements of research, materials and    p--rsonnel in sut)nort  of
                          operational use of Project ARTICliOia.  The Chief, Iledical Staff,
                          will.Lprovide medical support for ARTICHOKE field teams.
                           " fogs
                           "will conduct, within limitations of their facilities,
                      b   ' "O
                          research in the basic fields of science in support of tiiis r)ro,ject.
                          In addition,        11 condilcl, within limitations of their f2acili-
                          ties, specific research, other than medical, requested by the
                          Security Office in support of   operational aspects Of Project
                          ARTICHOKE.
                      c.  Liaison with the                                     In   support
                          of this Project  will be the responsi ility,o          under   an
                          arrangement already effected b
             6         d.   Responsibility for evaluation of foreign intelligence aspects
                          of Project ARTICI[OKE will remain with OSI.
                      e.  3pc,,irity Office wil.l. conduct liaison with the Service coinpon(@nts
                          concerned in this problem and in relation to operational aspects
                          of Project ARTICHOKE.

