                                      September 29, 1966
                Dear
                     Attached are a few thoughts related to items we discussed during
                my recent visit. Thanks to you and    I feel that the visit was
                extremely fruitful and trust that it will @e possible' to periodically
                dudlicate the experience.
                     By now you may have heard          @is due back this week.
                2However, I have included some miscellaneous systems specs and
                costs for the ultrasonic si-nal device.
                     I'm afraid I mislead.,   regarding a competing dog training
                kit. It turned out to be only a book containing instructions for making
                a home-made skinner box out of cardboard and mailin tubes.
                                                                9
                     Thank-you again for@the demonstrations, tours, and discussions
                which              provided.
                                                     9L=V rely, -

                        Ul'
                          i-rasonic Signal Svster,,i
                        Several commercially available sphericon "tweeters" advertise
                  a response up to 30-40 Kc.  The literature which we have seen suggests
                  that these claims need to be'supplemented b-y  efficiency  and  power
                  ratings at frequencies above 15 Kc.  An inexpensive speaker which
                  y2ou might try is:
                        Lafayette 2 lR67l5 Sphericon Tweeter @ $14. 40
                        (Lafayette Radio Electronics, 111 Jericho Turnpike, Syosset,
                         L. I., New York).
                  We could test these speakers and provide you with- approximate po-.ver
                  levels radiated at various frequencies and iriput power,. select an
                  app.-opriate amplifier and ocsillators, and shi2p the system 46-0 YOU
                  -vithin a period of about 2 weeks.  Coit for two  variable  frequency
                  generators, 30 watt amplilier, speaker,   and testing would amount to
                  2     Field Detector  for Ultrasound
                        The sphericon.speakers can be used as rather crude and cheap
                  microphones and could provide a simple technique for determining if
                  moderate to large amounts o2f ultrasonic energy are being radiated in
                  the field. You could filter the output of one of the above  speakers,
                  amplify, and display the signal voltage on a meter.  The microphone
                  would have to be positioned close to the speaker.
                        If we were to supply the signal system we could also provide a
                  self-contained detector system for an addition-al   1 5. 00.
                        Because of  4the  many  transmission  problems  associated  with
                  ultrasonic energy in the presence of wind or tl-iermal gradients it

                                               -2 -
                would be advantageous to consider an r. f. command system and signal
                generation at the platforra.  To evaluate the training problems associated
                with the generation of signals at the beast you could assemble a low cost
                model plane R. C. system which gates ultrasonic signal oscillators to
                an electrostatic transducer.  It is possible that t2he transducer could
                be eliminated if sufficient ultrasonic energy is radiated directly from
                the oscillator components, in which case the R. C. would have to switch
                the oscillators on and off.  Weight should be less than 4 oz. using off-
                the-shelf inexpensive gear.                could assemble such a system
                and evaluate the circuit component radiation if desired.
                3.
                                   1      ican be ordered from:
                     It might be simpler and less expensive to effect recall by merely
                4.                   ]Releise
                     R. F. command   receiver/actuator packages can be constructed which
                weigh less than                           To prevent'undesired release

                                                  3-
                 by chance interference a lo,,Tic circuit .vould be desirable, but this could
                 consist of                                              For training
                 purposes a lo@v cost model R. C. unit can be used.  A test unit can be
                 purchased directly from a model supply house (such as those described
                 in the advertisement left with vou.  If the availa0ble model units prove
                 too heavy or.unsuitable for your application               @could assemble
                 a lo%v cost receiver/actuator pkg.                                and is
                 tailored to your training situation.
                                                        IL

