                  TO i-a@' FILES
                        Experimntation in SI and H was conlinued in the dffices of
               the Technical Branch on 21 April 1954.
                                  ent as operators wer
                                                 sent were
                                              pre
                         n
                        Of necessity, the session was termi-nated at 8:00 F@t2 bec&use of
               transportation difficulties.  (Only one a:utonobile present and subjects
               resided in'various parts of the city which made more time necessary.)
                                            !quested a device to be constructed in our
               training afiop which would assist in determining to what extent involuntary
               tremor could be controlled in a subje6t, both in a waking state and under
        2       hypno3is.  This devica consisted of a series of holes drilled into the
               top plate of a metal'box.  Attached electrically was a pointed stylus
               which when inzerted in the holes gives no indication unless the side of
               the varioas holes were touched.  Upon touching the sides an e-'Lectrical
               circuit was made and a red light indicated failure to complete the
               action.
                    2                     ed much greater control under hypnosis.  In a
                             he c6 p   ed only six holes   In hypnosis she completed
               waking state s
               all ten with great ease.
                                        rq)leted ten in a wakiiig state.  Under hypnosis she
               was instructed  o be unable to complete the test.  After many trials she
               was unable to go further than No. 4 without lighting6 the light.
                         In the opinion of the irriter an                    s may indicate
               or otherwise help to confirn that many con-@,rlpoy;70,u"ldw@be@induced which
               could be useful to an individual.
                                                                                             c-i

