                             IM7'ESTIGATION OF ELECTRIC FISHES
                                        28 February 1973

                                CONTENTS
                 INTRODUCTION    ...........................
           2.    TECHI\IICAL DISCUSSION    ..................... 2
           3.    STATEMENT OF WORK   .......................   5
           4.    PRICE AND CONTRACTUAL INFORMATION  ........   8
           5.    PERS.ONNEL    .............................  10
                 REFERENCES  ...................               12

                                        1.  M"TRODUCTION
                       In a previous proposal, it was stated that the relationship between
                electroreceptors in the pattern recognition process of electric fish would
                be studied.  In a Midterm Report of September 1972, the phasic tuberous
                asynchronic electroreceptors and the synchronous tonic ampullary electro-
                receptors of the -Sternarchus albif2rons, a freshwater South American weak
                electric fish were described.  The tonic asynchronous ampullary electro-
                receptors of the same fish species were described previously.  Measure-
                ments were made and reported.
                       The studies on Gymnarchus niloticus,   a freshwater African weak
                electric fish., were continued, as were studies of the effect of different
                anaesthe'Lics on the el-e''ctrical activity of electric fishes.  The effect of D-
                tubocur,.rine and the counteref'Lect of neostia-mine on Sternarchus albifrons
                ,%,,.,ere also assessed-.
                        Three mormyrids (Gnathonemus petersii) were obtained,    a fresh-
                water African weak electric fish supposed to be the most intelliaent fish
                (sic).  The brain/body weight-ratio is close to that of human beings.  Pre-
                viously, one fish of this species was trained to jump through a circle over
                the water in order to get its food. Studies of the electric activity of these
                fishes Niill yield added information on pattern reco-nition ability of electric
                fishes. Based upon data generated by these studies, we now propose to
                generate design and test concepts for physical analoas of the electroreceptors
         9       of electric fish to be used in subsequent studies of underwater object detection,
                identification, and position.  These sensor analog simulation tests will be
                planiicd to be performed in a plastic water tank of 18 feet diameter.

                                    2.  TECIINICAL DISCUSSION
                         From previous and oncroinc, investimations, it was determined that
                Sternarclius albifrons, a South American freshwater hich-frequency weak
                electric fish, has three kinds of electroreceptors:
                         1.  synchronous tonic ampullary electric sensors
                         2.  asynchronous tonic ampullary electric sensors
  2                       3.  asynchronous phasic tuberous electric sensors
                Microelectrode recordino-s were made from these receptors.  The fish was
                anaesthetized with tricaine methanesulfonate (Finquel "Ayerst") and cura-
                rized with D-tubocurarine.  Subsequently,. neostic'mine was used to counter-
                act the loncr-term effect of curare.  A search for an anaesthetic that will
                not affect th2e frequency and amplitude of the electric sicrnals emitted by
                electric fish has been made.  This study is in progress and preliminary
                results indicate that thiopental sodium may not affect the electric sicrnal of
                Sternarchus albifrons.  Both ampullary and tuberous electric sensors are
                autorhythmic.  Two out of three kinds of electric sensors act independently
                of the main electric organ.  This means that we deal with 2three transmitting
                systems: a main orcan and two secondary represented by the autorhythmic
                activity.  There are also three kinds of electroreceptors, two of which are
                transmitters and receptors at the same time, and eacli of them may have
                some finer subdivisions with re-ard to sensitivity, amplitude, frequency,
                latency and habituation.
                         These electroreceoptors are part of the "lateralis sy5stem" of the fish
                and the otlier orc,,-tns related to this system like the lateral line receptors
                and the free neurom,,ists are certainly playing an important role in pattern
                recorrnition.
                                                   2

   s,mol-cu-c 1-coisAtid aill 9uiqljz)sop XOJ STS'CQ r, PDPIAOad o,%oq-c pollo sr, sule4sAs
    S.losuas tlslj olilo olo Jo S.X@1140 PU'C S@PII'U'OV Aq  S6TPnIS  -olurls  tIO142-CZTllq-CIS
        Irnsn aql xo4jz p@uu-eld St Apnls puc paui-c4qo aq ut:z) 'qstj oial-Dela  piaaul
      -jou.i Aouenba.Tj-A@.ol a@4-cA@ilsa ij u-E3ijIV uc 'llsia4ad sntuauotl;-cuf)
   -saic)a2ds ;jui-es xiatI4 Jo saaqtu@Tz tilTA,, 94-cziunT-UT-Uoz) ol s-noi;ollu snT4oiEuut,@9
         JO A4111q'C DT41 PDI'E.1-4SUOU.I@p OA-Utl S@Tpnls  SMOIA@.XA  -uoil-cool  4oalqo  pu-e
      UOII-E'UTA,CU UT. AJO-I JIDtIl PU'C AITZ'.EU.Itl4AIII04U-e JTGT44 C4 T.IOT4-qC).X  Ur  P@4'EQDT4saA
     -ut aq o4 9A-eq sxosues olaloale  asaiql  -sxosuas  oTx4oala  Jo  sed,@4  snoaeqnl
         O2A@l pu-e  siosues  oTa4o;Dla  lo  ;DcTA4  Amllndui'c  quo  stlq  'T4STJ  OT.14:)919  :q-C;Dt&
        Aotianba.xj-u.in-Epau-i xal-eA%.tlsaxj u-coiijv u-c Isn:)-i4ollu snT4;).i-cuuif,.E)
                      2                       -UOTI-L'OlUnU.XUXOO PU'B "saioads eui-es  9LI4  UT
  UOT                    Sa'['LUGU
     .4o-eaa4uT I-eloos           a Jo uoTI-Ec)  4uapl  'Said  lo  UOT  Z)OI  'UOTI-alA-EU  aOl
                                              il2T                    .4'8
    pe.nnbea suot              Tnbai eq4 apt,&oad ol satIsTj uilqaaz) Jo uia
                   .4ounj pe.T                                                 4sss       Siosuas
          eT41  lo  A17.  alduioo  aT41  S9;'BOIPUT  ST  J,  'All-BOTUlaT40OTq  lou  4,nq  'alu-cs  a-ql
      T40=  &IaA  pa3lOOl  &9tp  AIILIZTXU04-CUV  -TINLUT   S   DIZ13919   04   ;DATITSUDS   SI   4-etll
     quo Jetuoim pu-c '4uatueo-qdgTp J9413t& 01 -OAT  stias     ST  ;-elql  quo  :49TNa   Sur@2.10
        .&aosues   AnllndLu-c   lo   spuln   o&4   1(3la-eqs   uouiarj)   Isi.T4soai:Aaiq   uoTid-e"U'@X
        tiqzur,jqou.ist,le aui-es 9744 puc quo uo 4-cTq4 pa;r,.I;suouiap
              2             'UOT al4-e  tjonui  oo4  paaiaoai  4ou  EA-CTI  Siir,'D.IO  ZTJID@Icl  ;Dt[4
                               IU
         I'Ct[4 Suc2.10 Alosuas s4tua4sAs sllejo4,cl,, iciq4o S,TIST  OT.IIOE)JO ;DT4,L
                                         -s,giui;aua io sqoat                     UL,   IOTA-Et[
                                                             qo Jo OOUL-PIOA-8 P
         -,aq 'OUT OOQOS '4UE)'LUaAOUI Ut,@O S,TISTJ at[4 'juautc)orlds-tp xa;-eAk o4  pal-Elaa
         a.Te siosues xl4oq '.IDAC)A@OH  -pal'
                                                jla-clo  uaaq  4ou   sr-tl   jo4dooai   Aaosuas   Jo
        PuT31 jaii4o aql jo quo aT41 Jo ;Dloj  olql ui aouajajjt                            a
                                                               2  p   atll   Isio4daoax   Aiosu   s
      E)SaLI4 Jo q4oq 01 P040AOP tjO.1-C;DS;Dl Dlql  11-C  tilTAk  -;ou  sauo  4srl   oql   puetru.Eo
        auT
           .1  I-eje;-cl  uoluuioo  -C  04  poloauuoz  o-i-a  sauo  lsjlj  atl48  1-cq4  St  s4s-ctuoxnau
      ea.Tj pu-c sio4daoaa Siosuas ouil I-e.Talrl aill uaaA,4oq ac)uo   jjT
                                                                          la  p atli,

                                                                  :,7-
                of tonic ampullary clectrorecei-)tors and of phasic tuberous electroreceptors
                                     .--i
                in a mi(4term report.    Continuation of this work can establish physical
                analogs for other electroreceptors and sensory receptors of the "lateralis
                system" of electric fishes.
          2                                       s               oh
                        Microelectrode recording , histology, licr t microscopy,. electro-
                microscopy, and scannin- electronmicroscopy can be used to clarify the
                establishment of the physical analogs.
                        Some studies on the sensitivity threshold of electric fishes to electric
                stimuli were made by
                        This proposed study intends 2to extend this work. An extensive study
                of the sensitivity of different species of electric fishes to electric stimuli
                in the presence of noise and without noise will be made to find out which of
                the different types of sensory systems of the different species is most ef-
                fective in locatina and identifyinc, objects underwater.
                        For these experiments, we will use an instrumented pool2 facility.
                The distance at which an electric fish can identify movina and stationary
                objects and to communicate .vith specimens of its own species can be de-
                ducted from the distance, the composition and size of the objects presented
                to the subject and of the distance of back-playing electrodes and the applied
                attenuation to the sic-nal.  By addina- specific kinds and amplitudes of no2ise
                we will be able to find out how well the fish can extract the si(rnal from
                noise.
                        Having all of the previously mentioned data, we can proceed to the
                establishment of an underwater pattern recognition diacrram.  The established
                                                                       0
                physical analo-s of electric sensors and cross correlation will be proposed
   3             as a means for ideiitif in(r objects.
                                      y
                                                   4

                                   3.  STATEME'@,TT OF WORK
                                                                           /will provide
              the personnel, services and material necessary to conduct an investigation
               O'L@ electric fishes.  The tasks for Phase I and Phase II will be performed
               as outlined  below.
                      PIIASE I
                       1.   Investigate the ability of freshwate2r electric fishes to recoonize
                            patterns under water and how effectively they can differentiate
                            between different parameters when navic-ating. It is proposed
                            to use three or four of the following kinds of freshwater weak
                            electric fishes:
                            a.   Sternarchus albifrons, hic-h signal rate electric fish
                              2   with its frequency      nced only by change in the
                                 tank water temperature; region of oricin - subtropical,,
                                 tropical and equatorial South America.
                            b.   Gymnarchus niloticus, medium fixed signal rate electric
                                 fish with its frequency not influenced by chancre of tank
                                 water temperature; region of origin - subtropical,
     2                            tropical, and equatorial Africa.
                            C.   Gymnotus carapo, variable medium signal rate electric
                                 ri-sh, re7;-'o@n of@orig@n - subtropical, tropical, and
                                         t;l
                                 equatorial South America.
                             d.  Gnathonemus petersii, a variable low signal rate electric
                       2          fish o t e mormyridae family; region of origin - sub-
                                 tropical, tropical, and equatorial Africa.
                        2.   Microelectrode recording, histology, ii-ht microscopy, electro-
                                                                      t:l
                             microscopy and scanning electromicroscopy will be used as ne-
                             cessary to elucid,.ite and establish the interrelation of electric
                             receptors.
                         3.  Report.  A report of the six months' study will be submitted
                             at the end of Pli,.ise I.
                                                     5

                         PHASE II
                              The threshold of electric si
                                                          gn.11 stimuli eliciting a behavioral
                              response in electric fishes will be investic,,r,,Ited for:
                              a.  fishe's onvn Si-nal recorded on magnetic tape and played
                                  back and attenuated.
                             2 b.  same species but another subject fish's  electric  signal
                                  recorded on magnetic tape,  played  back  and  attenuated
                              c.  sinusoidal electric sional with same repetition rate as
                                                       c@
                                  the fish's own signal or slia        t;l
                                                              htly chanced  a2nd  attenuated
                              d.  signals as in (1) and (2) but with a noise source like
                                  gaussian noise and varying amplitude will be added
                                  through another pair of electrodes in the same water
                                  tank.
                              These e.%-periments will be carried out in a special round tank
                              of 18 feet diameter by 22 feet high and placed in a special tank
                              facility.
                         2.   From all these results, the distance will be calculated at which
                              an electric fish could detect its own or another elec#.-ric sicnal
                              considerinc, the attenuation, the distortion of the signal in water
                                        tzp                                                   I
      2                        and eventually the added noise.
                        3.    Physical analogs will be established for some of the electro-
                              receptors, displacement receptors, and other lateral line
                              type of receptors.
                        4.    A diagram for an underwater  pattern  recognition  simulation
                              of the electric fish's electric sensors system, usin- their
                     2         physical analogs and a special cross -correlation data pro-
                              cessin-, will be sul)i-nitted. A special iiistruniented under-
                              water pool facility and computer simul,,ttinc, equipment will
                              be considered for use for this proposition.
                        5.    Reports.  Financial monthly reports will be submitted.  A
                        0      final report will be furnished one year after contract award.
                              The scliedule for the proposed research is outlined in Fir. 5
                              Nvitli the estiiiiited time for cirryin- out each  liase.
                                                                           p
                                                   6

                                                                                                 CALENDAR MONTIIS
                                    TASIC                                        2     3    4     5
                                                                                                        6     7     8     9    lo   ii   12
                 1.  Investigate  pattern  recognition  ability  and    v
                      navigation abilit2y of three or four different
                      electric fish species.
                 2.   Investigate the interrelation of electric
                      receptors.
             p-q
                 3.   Report
                 1.   Establish the threshold of electric  s,@timuli                                       v
                      clicitiiig a behavioral response  In  electric
                      fish under different condi2tions.
                 2.   Establish the distance at Nvldch electric
                      sigmals can be detected by electric fish.
             rn  3.   Establish physical analogs of the electric                                                              IV'
                      receptors.
                 4.   Design a diagram for an undenvater simu-
                      lation of the  fish's  electrosensory  system.
                7 5.   Final report
                                                       Fig. 5.  Program Schedule.

                         4. PRICE AND CONTRACTUAL =ORIIATION
                                                   sur,c,ests that the proposed program
               be conducted over a one-year period under a cost-plus fixed-fee contract.
               The estimated costs for this program are shown at the end of this section.
                      The lal)or costs used in this proposal are based upon the current
               averaae rate of the level of2 personnel e.%-pected to be employed in the pro-
               posed effort. No premium for direct overtime expense has been included
               in this proposal.
                      The overhead rate used in this proposal is provisional and con-
               sists of all                            indirect costs and is adjusted for
               assumed unallowable costs. Overhead rates will be adjusted at the end
               of the fiscal year                            2    to actual costs excludin(r
                                                                                         0
               disallo,.vables, as determined by Government audit.
                                                   is under the audit cognizance of the
               Defense Contract Audit Ac,,@ncy,
                       Unless previously ivithdranvn in writing, 'this proposal ,vill remain
               valid for ninety days from the 9date on the cover.
                                                  8

                         ESTMLI@TE- D COST FOR A TWE, LVE- -MONTH PROGRAM
                                                       Man-Hours
                   PERSONNEL COSTS
                      Scientist 41                          1210
                      Scientist 23                            40
                      Scientist 12                           100
                      Technical Typist                        96
                   OVER2HEAD @
                   FPJ.LNGE BENEFITS @
                   TRAVEL: Ph,-zse I
                              Phase II
                   MATERIALS: Phase I
                                  Phase II
                     TOTAL DIRE, CT COST & OVERHEAD
                     GENERAL & ADMINISTRANVE EXPENSE @
                     TOTAL ESTIIVTATED COST
                     FIXED FEE
                     TOTAL ESTIIMATED COST PLUS2 FIXED FEE
                                                     9

