     -.4TAIIDAM POOM "M                                                     c
    16
             ce Memorandum *UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
      TO     :Chief j, Security Branch                           DATE: 11 October 1949
       FLOM    Interrogation Research Section"
      SUBJECT:-Suggested Over-411 Research Program*
               The necessity for keeping wall informed of Present interrogation  m2ethods-
          and special operational methods used by unfriendly countries  cannot be  over
          emphasized.  Below are listed various suggested phases of research and   pro-
          posed details for the carrying out of 9. progressive and extremely active
          research program.
               It is recommended that ever7 effort be made to acquire and review existing
          literature covering past and present interrogation techniques  and the use of
          such operational procedures as hypnotic and drug control.  The  review  would
          include all artiolos in periodicals and books written by specialists on such
           ubjects as general interrogation, psychological interrogation, the use of the
          Polygraph, truth serum and bypnc;sin. These specialists may not  be  activ2ely
          engaged in interrogation but mmy be working in allied fields which might provide
          valuable contributions to our own interests. -This survey would also include tho
          careful scrutinization of all intelligence reports involving interrogation methods
          and special operation&l techniques. The flow of information  from  this  source
          would be greatly accelerated by the Issuance of an interrogation collection 2re-
          quir ement.  The "existing technique' survey should also include facilities for
          the investigation of the use or suspected use of  specipa  teelmiques*  Madical
          and psywhiatric practitioners would be valuable contributors and  liaison  with
          such inditiduals would be extremely benefiew,  The research sections of police
          departments and criminology laboratories might all prove to be very2 beneficial*
             gested methods for liaison with such organizations will be covered  in  &
          separate memorandum. Good liaison with other governmental  agencies  and  the
          various branches of the military service would b@l very helpful.  Liaison  with
          professional byp=tists could contribute many i6interx which  might  be  applied
          to certain phases of our problems. Liaison with  cert2ain  universities  which
          are outstanding in fields allied to our interests would  be  beneficial.  In
                      liaison with the above mentioned organizations  and  individuals
          some cases$
          would involve &-cover to conceal CIL interest in such matters.,
               The survey of 'existing techniques' previously mentioned would  take  care
          of methods used in the past and present and made a matter of  record  through
     2     books, periodicals and reports. It is felt that active  research  should  be
          conducted in conjunction with "technique  verific&tio  ,  This  verification
          would involve research an reportedly existing techniques and  actual  experi-
          mentation carried out to prove and disprove their value  and  offectiteness.
          This research would involve the volunteering of subjects for actual laborator7y
          experiments. Reports covering these experiments would be  furnished  in  the
          form of lectures# demonstrations.and systematic written coverage*

      Ws
          Memorandum tot  Chief, Security Branch  From:  Interrvgation Research Section
          Subjects  Suggested Over-All Research Program             n October 1949  P. 2
               Besides the survey of 'existing toohniquee'to and the 'technique verifi-
          oation'p a third  phase shou.Id be kept active covering "now methods",  This
          program would also involve actual laboratory research and the2 issuin& of
          verbal and written reports.  This phase would also include the inprovownt
          of techniques already in existence*
               As of this date, it is felt that this Interrogation Research Section is
          =ore progressive and far in advance of.all existing govermental, police, and
          private research activities concerninle the use of op1erational lwpnosis and
          highly specialized methods of interrogation.  It in felt that this lead might
          be maintained and  that the program might be further accelerated by the e"oution
          of the  above  mutioned ouggestiozw*

