                                                                                  Or-,tober 1955
                                                                              25
                                                                                           n
                          Hypnotic research done in medicalp      laboratory or stage co texts
                       es techniques and   results valid primarily     for therapy and enter-
                  produc
                  tainment.- Application  of hypnosis  to  covert  operations  poses  th@.,  familiar
                         '"r marrying a    ans,developed for other purposes to g@w require-
                  problem0               me
                  menta6
                      2.  The broaekinds of situations exist for such use           with    wittin@j,
                  willing subjects and with unwitting,2 unwillirig subjects.  Sufficient infor-
                  mation and.exp6rienme have been accumulated to indicate a concrete potentia]L
                  of use for hypnosi's",with,@itting,,willing subjects for-such      purposes as:
                  age regreasionp cover story- build-upt.instruction,.and post-        hypnotio.sug-
                  gestion..,,
                    2                                              subjects, the  question  whether
                           For use  with unwittins,, unwilliri,
                  dispuised induction is possible must first be resolved.  This,quostion and
                      tooedent probl
                  an an               em  relative  to  drug-assisted  induction  can   be   answered
                  only  by.-exper@mentation  which  because  of  the2  technical  and  equipment  tac-
                  tore involved can best be accomplished byl..@@
                     '4.-.Drug assisted induction problems involve assessment of          two groups
                  of drugs noted for their anxiety relief characteristicat         rauwolfia    deri-
                  vatives and chlorpromazine derivatives..  The tranquilizing effects         of those
        2                                                              their  ability  to  assist   or
                            gest  the  desirability   of   determining
                  drugs sug
                  shorten the attainment of the hypnotic state with attention to         the   amount
                  of time required for such effects to  occur.       To be answered is   whether
                  these drugs,viii make the ordinarily nonsusc-eptible i2ndividual        susceptible
                  to hypnosia'and whether they,vill'.1nareass ouseeptibility,.:Ln-the       &2xe  ady
                  ouseeptible'individual.,
                       5.  'With  rega@d,to whether   disguised   induction is  ossible,    equipment
                  which is most   easily'available'thro4gh-                            channels should
          2        be.investigated.  Thess@items include
                             (a) '.Yietabulator (BMR - Basal Metabolic Rate     determinator)
                             (b)  Electroencephalograph (EF-0 - brain wave      determinator)
                             (a)  Electrocardiograph (EKU - licart wave determinator)
                             (d)   Audiometer   (hearing   acuity   determinator)
                                                              -Lp,   rel
                             Disguised induction emphasizir          axation   as the main ostensible
                   aim is typified by use of the B14R macliine (5a).      This woilld appear to offer
                   assured success considering that the subject is uryier       controlled conditions
                  including, good and 3water    intake  and  medication  for   a   maximum.of.twelva,!

                hours.  In addition, the operator controls the very air the subject
                breathes at the time of the test - a p,@irfect situation for  increasing
                the carbon dioxide level, an alleged aid to hypnotic  induction  -  and,
                the test'can be run and rerun with monotonous repeated requests for
                further relaxation ("to enable a meaningful tracing  on  the  machine")2,
                a procedvre whixh it appears offers considerable  promise  of  achieving
                hypnosi,.,P. through disgdsed induction.
                   -7.  Disguii3edinduction  emphasizing  relaxation  and/or  fascination
                is typified by use-of  the EM (5b) and EK3 (5c) machines,   These   machines
                offer a situation where the subject is in a resting  condition  and  2amen-
                able to direction oX. his sensory powers at  the  machine  (fascination)
                which coupled-with,,relaxa-Vioii injunctions may result in achieving hypnosis.
                    8. "Disguised induction involving  overpowerment  of  the  sonse  of
                hearing is"involved in the ui's of  the  audiometer  (5d).  This  imtrument
                                                      pe2rception at the o  erator's  con-
                places,the subject's entire audition                     p
                trol. A combination of testing tones,  monotonous  fatiguing  tones,  and
                ''induction patterli.requires testing*
                           Less'formidable equip,-.ient (ophthalmascope) and an :Lnst
                     g..
                available to the Security Office, th6 2polygraph,.can be   utilized   for
                testing other  methods   of disguised induction.. Use  of  the  ophthqlma  cope
                involves fixation  of  the sense of sight  under  controlled  circumstances
                with the  subject  exposed to relaxation sug,-,estions.  A  combination  of
                examinations fatiguing to the eye and relaxation  suggestions  ("so  that
                the  examination2  will  be successful.") may be sufficient to achieve hypnosis.
                   10.  The  use  of   the polygraph combines fascination  and  relaxation.
                                                                                       nd
                The combination of a quiet setting,  fascination  with  the  machine,  a
                rele@xation suggestions is comparable with that involving  the  electro-:
                encephalograph.(EM) and electrocardiograph (EKG).'
                    11.,;The    procedures outlined lend themselves to inclusion ina
                routine  security   and/or medical processirg of  a  subject.  The  procedures
                involving medical apparatus could-be tailored to a  situation  @.-herein the
                subject is under medical care and not  bding  "processed".  We  need  to
                dete-i@dne the.degre2e and parcentage.of success obtainable by sucti  r@wans.
                    .12.. Proposalsi
                         (l)- That@@be requested to assess the      time  and  perfornance
                     aspects of the tranquilizing.drugs and their   effects  on  induction
                      of hypnosis.
                                                     2
                                                 8            -7

                       (2)  Tha      be requested to assess the feasibility of
                    achieving dilqsigzwsed hypnosis throui7h use of the metabulator.,
                    electroencephalogrwh, electrocardiograph' and audiometer, and
                    devise the appropriate "induction pattern to accompany use of
                    these machines,
                       13)0 Th              9 -a4uthorized to proceed with mem5ers of
                    the Se urit     ric'O' to investig@its the use of the ophthalmoscooe
                               y  'Tor purpose of aciiieving disguised induit@on of
                        polygraph
                    and
                    hypnosis,
   !All
   '41

