                                                 4
                                             May  8,  1972
                                     Volume 3 Number 19
                 ofice Pre-,j                                                          Psychiatrists   Pan
                 )r Pois                                                               Shrink Power
                 3cing  prospect  of  two  political  conventions  in  o2ne  summer,    Two  NIMH   psychiatrists   have   blasted   the  
Amer.   Psychiatri
                                                                                                                                               
C
                 iami  Beach  police  chief  Rocky  Pomerance  is  beefing  up  his    Assn.'s   stand   on   mental   health   coverage  
under    national
                 )ftware.  Determined  to  prevent  a  replay   of  2 Chicago   '68,    health   insurance   3S   unworkable,   self-serving,  
inappropriate
                 :)merance   asked   humanistic   psychologist   Denis    O'Donovan    to  delivering  adequate  care  and  sure  to   bankrupt
the   men-
                 id  team  to  put  300-member  police  force   through   intensive    tal health service system . .  .  In  a  private 
position  paper  to
                 .)man relations  trainina  ...  Weekly  sessions,  starting  earl2y    be sent to key    members  of  Congress,   E.   Fuller 
Terrey   and
                 tis year, have ranged from Constitutional  law  and  civil  rights    Robert  Taylor   claim   APA's   demand   for  
extensive   hospital-
                 creative   crowd   control,   O'Donovan   tells   ST.   Techniques    ization benefits  and  for  recognition  of 
psychiacrists  as  chief
                 'clude simulation,  meetings  with  protest  leaders,  role  play-    care  providers  not 2 only  would  raise   costs   but 
also   would
                 :g .. During one role switch, an  officer,  asked  what  he  would    create   a   superf,cial   manpower   shortage,  
enabling   psychia-
                 if  he  were  a  shrink,  responded:  "I'd  take   careful   notes    trists  to  sluff  off  difficult  cases.  The  stand 
also   ignores
                 id write  a  book."  O'Donovan  is  taking  careful  notes,  plans    research   on   mental   health   treatment,   Tor2rey  
and    Taylor
                 write book.  He's  at  Florida  Atlantic  U.,  Boca  Raton  33432.    assert .
                                                                                          In  brief,  they  maintain  that  hospitalization  is
less   ef-
                                                                                       fective   than   cfeap   alternatives-day-care   and  
walk-in   ser-
                 lesearch Tips                               2                          vices-and   that   psychiatrists   are   no   more   
effective,.than
                                                                                                                  -       T- -. --. -.-@ - I
                                                                                       psychologists  and-  c@thi,i         0 back      up     
contention,
                 or Crime Fighters                        2                             -they-prdpoie financial    .restrictions  on  use   of 
psychiatrists
                 esearchers  met  enforcers   at   Justice   Dept.-sponsored   sym-    in    insurance-paid    psychotherapy    and    other   
non-medical
                 osium  on  law  enforcement  science  and  technology  last   week    services.
                 @  Washington,  D.C.  Challenge  to  enforcers:   use   behavioral       Paper  is  bound  to   stir   interest   2in   House 
and   Senate
                 7owledge to stem crime and improve corrections.                       health    subcommittees,    especially    Senate   
subcmie.    where
                 Explanations  of  prison  violence  that  ignore   social   fabric    one temporary staffer is psychiatrist Joseph Perpich.
                 f prison won't work, U.  Illinois  sociologist  Edith  Flynn  told    (in deference to  past  equests  from  NIP.IH  director 
Bertram  Brown,
                 ieeting. Prisons are  run  with  tacit  consent  of  inmates,  and    please write Taylor.for positicn pap--r at his home
address:      SCOI
                 Jministrators  know  it.  Any  change  that  disrup'ts  intricate,    White Flint St., Kensington, Md. 20795.)
                 iformal social relations between  inmates  and  staff  raise  odds
                 )r  violence,  whether  change2s  increase   control   or   reform.    Glimpse at Nader's
                 lynn said her  analysis  is  no  excuse  for  status  quo,  but  a    NIMH Report
                 lea for  change  management.  She  urged  officials  to  read  new    Ralph  Nader  21ready  is  getting   letters   from  
mental   health
                 iodel guidelines on inmate rights  from  Illinois  Dept.  of  Cor-    pros  scared  silly  that.the  forthcoming   Nader  
Raider   e?cposd
    2             @ctions. Write her for  paper  and  info  at  Soc.  Dept.,  U.  of    of  the  mental  health  complex  will   hurt  
business.   According
                 linois, Urbana 61801.                                                 to  Nader  ace  Franklin  Chu,  chief  investigator  on 
the   study,
                 Yale sociologist  Albert  Reiss,  who  has  studied  police  c-ime    brief  talks  by  Nader  folks  at  recent  meetings  
have   stirred
                     2                                                                                             I NJ
                 )r  some  time,  urged  cops  to  stop  focusing   on   criminals,    up justified  fears  that  N  H  and  mental  health 
pros   are   in
                 :art focusing on crime and to  .become     professional.      Among   for a drubbing  .  .  .  Fears  were  fueled  even  more
by  limited
                 Is  tips,  envirorimentat  prevention:  tell  retailers  shopl2ift-    circulation  of  a  content  summary  that  may  bear 
only  histori-
                 ig isn't a crime unless  merchants  take  steps  to  protect  mLr-    cal interest by  the  time  the  report  comes  out 
(best  estimates
                 landise. "if people will buy on  impulse,  they'll  steal  on  im-    now are for summlr release).
                 ulse," where merchandise is out for grabs.                            n Main issue will  be  neglect  of 2 the  consumer.  The
rest  @,vill
                 Psychologist  Saleem  Shah,  he@d  of  NIMH   Center   for   Study    be  icing,  but  the  icing  has   pros   trembling.  
Examples   the
                 f  Crime  and  Delinquency,  uroed  using   research   to   divert    summary include:
                 ids from  corr,@ctions.  He  plugged  completed  firs,,  phase  of    n Portrayal  of  mental  health  complex  as  mental 
hea!th  ma@'ia,
        2         .udy  by  socio.ogist  Marvin  Wolfgang,  at  U.  Penn.,  for  im-    founded and  fed  by  combination  of  professional 
set,--i'nterest,
                 ortant  policy  clues.  Wolfgang  tracked  all  10,000  boys  born
                                                                                       congressional sugar daddies and a po@,verful health
lobby.
                 1 Philadelphia in 1955  to  get  first  sophisticated2  probability    a  Argument  that,  iike  it  or  not,  what's  needed 
for   mental
                 lalysis of delinquency' Of   group,   3,500   had   one   recorded    he-31th  is  not  pros  and  programs  but   better  
jobs,   housing
                 in-in with latv: almost half had  no  further  trouble.  Six  per-    and socia: support mechanisms.
                 ,nt  were  chronic  offenders,  accounting  for  more  than   half       I)irty  details  of  elitis2m,  cronyism   and  
power-playing   at
                 a@inquent acts  of  the  total  group.  Question,  said  Shah,  is    NIMH,  at  universities  and  in  professions  that 
have  little  to
                 here  to  invest  energy  and  money  for  intervention  (Wolfgang    do with delivering mental goods.--
                 iggests after third offense). Study  also  shcr%vs  no  graduation    0 Charge  of  over-errphasi!  on  research  and 
expens2ive  ser.,ices
                 seriousness  of  o'lf(,nses.  U.  ChiC3qO  ?ress  %,illl  riublish    aiid rfairs oi ovf!r-auundance of lo%  -  quality 
rf-sd.-.rci),  t,2c'e
                 udy, Dt3linqL! :ncy in a Birth Cohort. i::                       is 1 of research rJ;rec,,ion and deartli -)f 2direct prob!em
                 : '@,voik on seL-.@;nd  phase,  taking  sampit-.  of  original  group
                 ast age 18.                                                           Worst  of  all,  report  will  gi%e  general  impression
that   mental
                                                                                       health  pros  are  no  better  or  worse  than  other 
pros   and   that
                           9                                                            Nat'l  Institute  of  Mental  Health  officials  are 
very  r-L.@   like
                                                                                       other government bureaucrats.

                                                                                              centering   college   around   student.   Limited
copies    available
                                                                                              free,  Presicient's  Office,  Yale  U.,  New  
Haven,   Conn.   065/'-O.
                           mo,4                                                               v     ENVIRONP4ENT:     2Soiabi     Tree    
House     Puppet     Theater
                   LOGJAM:  Study  of  jail  suicides  by   psychiatrist   Bruce   Danto                          takes    ecology    message  
to     grade-schools.
                   suggests hidden evil in  court  backlogs  and  stiff  bail  policies.                          Shows   educate   kids   on  
causes,    prevention
                   Of 10 suicidts  at  Wayne  County  (Mich.)  jail  over  three  years,
                      2                                                                                            of  pollution;  are  
especially   effective,   says
                                                                                                                            Jalf   Peyton,  
because   pupp,@Li    are
                   .our prisoner@ i-.d no bord set and           h@zi ',-onds of                                  PtCLUCOr
                   310,000  or  r,-  -,.re.  "Thus,"  says  Danto,  "5even  out  of  the                          underdeveloped    as   
teaching     tool.     Write
                   10 suicides c.,;id not  see  their  way  clear  to  leaving  jail  in                          Peylon,   P.O.   Box   270,  
New    Haven,    Conn.
                   the  forseeabl.,-  future."  Write  Danto   at   Suicide   Prevention              2            O'@@SOZ    a   
PUBLICATIONS:     Editor     Jacques
                   Center, Psyci-.iatric lnst., 1151 Taylor, Detroit 48202.                   Mehiet   hopes   new   international   
quarterly,    Cognition,    will
                   2  MONEY:   New   initiation   and   development   grants   to   heip      provide    forum    for    cognitive   
research-downplaying    informa-
                   poverty  areas  plan  mental  health  services  available  now   from      tion   processing,    emphasizing    child   
development,    psycholin-
                   NIMH. Grants up to S50,000 each are for assessing local                    guistics,  related  fields.  First  issue  this 
spring,  with  articles
                   needs,  designing  services.  Contact   assoc.   dirs.   for   mental      by   T.   Bower,   Noam   Chomsky,   Jonas  
Langer.   Individual   subs
                2   health at  HEW  regional  offices.  List  of  regional  offices  from      S12,   Mouton,   P.O.   Box   482,   The  
Hague,   Netherlands.    Send
                   Art,Cosing,   Rm.   11C-17,   NIMH,   5600   Fishers   Lane,    Rock-      manuscripts   to   Thomas    Bever,    Psych.   
Dept.,    Schermerhorn.
                   ville,   Md.   2OSS2.   N   SYMPOSIA:   First   Western    Hemisphere      Hall,  Columbia  U.,  New  York   City   100272  
...   Spiritual   Corn-
                   Conference   on   Acupuncture,   Kirlian    Photography    and    the      munity  Guide  includes  list  of  centers  in  
U.S.,   Canada:   cata-
                   Human Aura features Stanley Krippner, Thelma Moss,                         togs   Eastern   spiritual   methodologies;  
lists   mag3zines,   books
                   J.R.   Worsley   of   College   of   Chinese   Acupuncture,   London.      of   interest.   $2.95   from    Spiritual   
Community,    Box    1080,
                   Tickets   ($7)   for   day-long   symposium   May   25   at    United      San  Rafael,   Calif.   94902.
                   Engineering  Center,  345   47th   St.,   New   York   City,   avail-      a     PSYCHING     CONGRESS:     Amorphia,    
pro-pot      legalization
                   able  at  door.  Info   from   Carie   Harris,   515   Howard   Ave.,      group,   la2unches   Washington's   first  
psychedelic    drug    lobby.
                   Staten   Island   10301   ...   Phenomenologically    oriented    Du-      Chief   lobbyist   is   28-year-old   lawyer  
Gordon   Brownell,   for-
                   ,  m -0- -                                                                             staffer  and   Reagan   worker,   wh-
still   works   part
                                      quesne   U.   psychology   dept.   sponsors   The- 2     mer Nixon
                                      ories    and    Applications    of     Logotherapy      time  for  GOFR  strategist  Kevin  Phillips. 
Focus   is   on   decrim-
                                      course  July  10-28,  to  be  taught   by   Viktor      inalization  and  importance  of  credibility  
with   users   in   drug
                                      Frankl.  Course  for  credit   costs   $213,   but      ed.   Contact   Blair   Newman,   Bo2x   744,  
Mill    Valley,    Calif.
                                      public  is  invited  to  lectures  for  Sl.  Write      94941.    N.INPUT:    Researchers    Pat   
McNaughton    and     Fr-dix
                                      Graduate   Dean,   Duquesne,    Pittsburgh,    Pa.      Bischel  want  info  on   studies   illuminating 
classroom   d;scourse
                                      15219  ...  Youth  and   Drugs   Itkstit2ute   June      and   verbal   interaction.   Pair   plan  
symposium   at    lnternat'i
                   18-19 at Nort.;ieastern U. in Boston.  Designed      for       school      Congress   of   Applied   Linguistics   in  
Copenhagen    in    Au-ust.
                   and   community   drug   program   personnel.   Info   from    Taylor      Contact  them  at  Claremont  lnst.  of  
Linguistic   Studies,   Clare-
                   Roth,   Northeastern,   360   Hunt2ington    Ave.,    Boston,    Mass.      mont,   Calif.   91711.    a    DEPRESSION:   
U.    Michigan's    lrst.
                   02115.   0   UP   FROM   ASHES:   Looks   like   Stanford    Research      for  Social  Research  it  conducting  first 
annual  survey  of   state
                   Inst.  has  resurrected  shortlived  White   House   National   Goals      of  nation's  mental  health.  Emphasis  is   an 
study   of   dep.-es-
                   Research  staff2.  SRI  has  set  up  Center  for  the  Study  of  So-      Sion, but  survey  will  also  cov-er  positive 
attributes   of   mental
                   cial  Policy  to  helpdecision-make-s  develop   and   forecast   al-      health.   Contact   survey   dirs.   psychiatrist
Monica   Blumenthal,
             '3
                   ternative   procrams.    Washington    office,    headed    by    NGR      epidemiologist   Sidney   Cobb,    psychologist  
John    French  2  Jr.
                   staffer Charles V%rilliams, is at  161  1  N.  Kent  St.,  Arlington,      (Ann   Arbor   48106).   9   MEDIA:   Deadline  
May   15   for    Amer.
                   Va.   22209.   n   EDUCATION    1980:    Enrollment    in    nation's      Psychological   Foundation's   1972   nat'i   
media    awards.    C.-i-
                   colleges  will  increase  55  percent  during  1970's,   will   reach      terion2:   "reporting   which   increases    the 
public's    knowledge
                   total of 13.3 million  by  fall  1980,  predicts  Nat'l.  Center  for      and@understanding     of     psychology."    
Categories:     newspaper;
                   Educational  Statistics.  Two-year   colleges   will   grow   fastest      TV,   radio,   movie;    magazine,    book,   
monograph.    For    info
                   (up  84  percent  by  1980,  from  1.6   to   3   million).   2Report,      and   nominations,   contact   Jim   Warren,  
APA,   1200   17th    St,
                   Projections  of  Educational  Statistics  to   1980-81,   also   con-      NW,    Wash.,    D.C.    20036.    2    COO-COO: 
"Corporations    may
                   tains  data  on  per-pupil   expenditures,   breakdown   on   degrees      follow   Skinnerian   principles,"   allows  
behaviorism   critic    M.
                                                        2  I
                   to  be  awarded,  teachers'  salariel  t's  available  this   summer,      Brewster   Smith,   "because   corporations   are
basically   pig!3on-
                   GPO, Wash., D.C. 204OZ . Study         on  future  of   Yale   recom-      brained."  Good   way   to   make   industry  
sensitive   to   environ-
             ,,t   @nends reducing four-year curricula to three for baccalaureate             mental   quality,    Smith   2 told    recent   
Western    Psychological
             @l    degree.  Study  by   Yale   faculty   group   headed   by   political      Assn.  meeting,  would  be  "to  set   up   a  
suitable   reinforcement
             h
                   ;cientist  Robert  Dahl,  urges  other  innovations  aimed   at   re-      scheduleof   profitandloss."   He's   at  
U.Cal-Santa   Cruz   (95060).
             I     !havior     Today     The     Weekly     Newsletter 2    Del     tvia(,     Califoonia     92014
                   tw                   vy@intm ed.tw                                         GE.Avloq TODAY                                   
D.:  M.,,  C.-.
                   j -If. -v joft                                  Joh@ S.111@                     P.."   .1 PS@C@ULOGY T                    2 
Ch.,-.,       C,       T,
                                                                                                                               .@d COM GOOKS.
                                         ^-St..t Ed.1-                                          .    .....                 8@     P-, N     
111.    C.              -
             as    Pt. K@.9                                            2                       S-.@o I ... O..'@ P" .1 o@   ,. C.,,,, -d
@d,,i-.  C-,,,.,         1972         ,
                                           Olbw-s RobWtS                                      9...   @.           l@. MAY NOT St RE PR004JCE 0
I% ANY FOAM WITMCkiT WRITTEN
                   4@t M@ -   lediuw    2 R.00~                        S@. N                   Plom,&S$O#4.
                        H@.                T G@ge Mm.              mk wtb
                   @a@ft Et$,ow                                  c@-it'.6 ad.uws              Oi-I SUBSCRIPT.Oft COPIPESPONGENCE S.. M3. 6-kW.
C.O.. 90302,
                   C@lh-0 K@wl                                     A,lh.,   M.   BI.Vt@tid.   ".D- @..  -d-. .@. I,-       i,-.               
.,Ih   -.   Wd...    All..    6@*
                                                                                                   to,    10 W    @d  2   A.-'     S.50        
.4
                                                                   Gowge  S.   A-v"ids.   Ph.D. Sloot-t,-.
                                                                         R@..      Ph      0.
                                                                                                                                   BEHAVIOR
TODAY                    may5 8. 19'12

                                                                   4t?tl -.e@

