                                                      February8, 1967
                           Dear
                                  Enclosed is a short Progress Repoft of our work
                           to date pursuant to--
                                                         Very truly yours,

                                                                                                                                               
AMk
                                          ol

                                                                                 Agri.
                                                I January to 31 January 1967
                         PROGRIESS REPOR'R
                         r.   PREZOELECTRIC CRYSTALS
                              Several PZT 5-B series connected ceramic birnorphs have been
                         obtained from Clevite.  A test rig was built to a-Uow electrical and
                         mechanical measurements on these cer    amic crystals.  The test rig
                         allo%vs a thin rectalngular crystal to be mounted cantilever fashion;
                         i.e., clamped at one end with the rest of the element suspended in air.
                         A stop was machined to allow the free far end of the crystal to be de-
                         p.-essed only .020".  Foz the 1. 7" by . 7" crystal which has been
                         slubjected to test this amount of deformation re-)resents a strain of
                         about 2 x 10 -4 which is 209,lo of the e' ec@ted fiacture strain and sufficieat
                                                              XP
                         to produce a peak voltage transient of  13  volts.  The  experimentation  with
                         this crystal has bten  c2oncerned  vn"th  estabushing  the  transient  or  rin"
                         characteristics.  Electrical voltage output is monitored on an oscilloscope.
                         and the crystal is set in (decaying) oscillation.by depressing the end to
                         the stc-p with a piece of plastic and then slidin,c the plastic off the end of
                         the crystal.  Oscillation at 150 cps occurs with an approximately ecpo-
                         nential- amplitude Zecay at a tir@e constant of 83 milliseconds (with a 10
                         meg electrical load). This ti@ae constant can  be  interpreted  as  equivalent
                         to saying that the system has a Q of 39 with am electrical  open  circuit.  As
                         the resistance connected to crystal is decreased the Q  is,  lowered  and  the
  2                       oscillation dies out faster.  A lumped const,--nt electromechanical model
                         of the crystal was used to de%,-clop expressions for total system Q and
                         total electrical power delivered to the load resistor as functions of e.\-ternal
                         load resistance. The optimurn resistance  was  thus  calctilated  and  when  a
                         resist-or of this value is connected to the test crystal, Q and voltage de-
                         creas3 to values within the e.\porimental error        517,)) of  the  calculated
                         values. According to  our  calculations  the  marimum  efficiency  of  enerery

                                                               -2 -
                             conversion is 50@'a with a pure resistive  load  of  the  optimum  value  and
                             the quantity of power for a 2017a strain is 20 j2 Joule per  square  inch  cf
                             crystal area for each transient mechanical excitation.  Since the actual
                             load presented by an electronic packa2ge will not be a pure resistance
                             the actual conversion efficiency will be.less than 501*.  Our previously
                             assumed value of 207* efficiency still appears a reasonable one.
                                   In the remaintng contract time work %vM continue to establish the
                             desi-n requirements of a piezoelectric ener,7,y converter.
                             11.   ENIG SOURCE RESISTANCE
                                   Our consultants have determi@ed that the most promising electrode
                             materials a.@-e  pla.tinum, gold, stainless steel, and tantalum.  3 mil
                             diameter wires of all four metali@.,have been ordered.  The stainless
                                                      0 PT I 00,'o rRi wires have been rec
      2                       steel and platinum (90T                                      eived    already
                             Teflon coated.  When the other wires'arrive they will be Teflon coated
                             by a local  compa@y.  Ch@r  animal  experiinent  consultant  is  expected  to
                             begln work immediately using the materials on hand with laboratory rats
                             as the experimental 3stibjects.

