                         Q'UARTE,RLY TECHNICAL PROGRESS REPORT
                                    I August - 31 October 1971
           Collection and general screening of materiil on personnel incapacitation was
           completed in August.  Thede acEiviLida hive since been pa:raued on a n-iain-
           tenance basis only.  Recommendations w@--re presented to        on August 23rd,
    2       af; to the utilization of the remaining research effort.  Sinr-e theye appeared
           to be very little in the way of "brand new" ideas for incapacitation, we sugges-
           ted that a systems approach be used in which several grovps or farnili.!s of
           techniques would be reviewed and reported an in as uniforrn a form- at as
           possible.  This approach will ultimately provide a matrix of iriforrnation by
        2   means of which characteristics of different techniques can be compared.  Our
           ma-in-ern.phasis will be on potential applications, physiological considerations
           and recommendations for future research.
           The first substant-'.Ve report entitled "Electric Current as an Agent for Person-
           nel Incapacitaaon, It was completed in October.  An outline of the substantive
           lportiozi of this report is appende2d.  Electric current appears to be a promising
           means of delivering a wide spectrum of incapacitation to a single individual
           (or a few ind:@Viduals).  Application of the agent can be well controlled and is
           reasonably safe u--ider appropriate conditions.
           The ne:xt subject z@rea to be revie,med will be impact and i4s application as an
           incapacitating agent.
                                      Administr6ative Aspects
           1.  A six-months no-cost  extension of the project was granted on ZO September
           1971.  The new cornpletion date is 30 April 1972.  This time extension, along
           with an acceleration of the substantive work of the program will allow compl@-
           tion of the project within the extended time limit.

                       0                                                       0
                  E.-:pcnditures to date:
                                           Quarter                   Climulative
                                           AMOLIrlt     of total       Arnount        of total
              Nov. 1970-Jan. 1971         $                1.2      $                    1.2
              Feb. - Apr. 19 7 1      1                    14.4                          15.6
              May-Jul. 1971                                7.7                          23.3
              Aug.-Oct. 1971                              22.3                          45.6
                                                     2-

                   E:LECTRIC CURRENT AS AN AGENT FOR PERSONNEL INCAPACITATION
                                           1.   Potential Applications
                                          II.   Physical Variables of Electric Current
                                         Ill.   Physiological Considerations
                                                A.   Effects of Electrical Current on 14urnans
                                          2      B.   The Human Body as an Electrical Conductor
                                                C.   Skin Resistance
                                                r>.  Burns and 6ther Thermal Injur-Les
                                                -E - Pulsed Current
                                                F.   Overcoming Skin Resistance
                                                C;.  Path ol Current Flow Through t;he Body
7                                                B-'  Physiol@gical Conclusions
                                          IV.   Other System Factors
                                           V.   Equipment State of the Art
                                          VI.   Recornrnendations

