                                                                24 March 1972
                         ME.,MORANIDUM FOR T.qE RECORD
                         SU13JECT: Trip Report
                              1.  The                       group will un-:iertake preliminary
                         evaluztion of Kirlian electrophotography of organic materialq in an
                         attempt to verify ,2,ome of the Russian claims f.:)r this technique.
                         Within the limits of the remaining contract fun.:Is, investigat-Lons will
                         be undertaken concerning:  (a)  discrimination  of  plant  material  treated
                         with organophosphorus compounds; (b) differei3tial Kirlian signatures
                         between a variety of plant life; (c) changes in signature as 2a function
                         of health or disease of the plant; (d)'investigation of the "holography
                         phenomena" in which a photograph of the entire object is registered
                         on the film when portions of the object are absent; and (e) film signa-
                         tures of human hands  or  other  body  parts  under  normal  conditions  and
                         when treated with local anesthesia or restricted blood su2pply.
                              2.  Mr.                     ihas agreed to cooperate with
                         in permitting utilization of his apparatus in this work.  Mr.
                         is not wi-Lting of Agency sponsorship.
                              3.  The                  has  constructed  a  working  prototype  model
                         of the Kirlian ap@@:ra,tus which was demonstrated in the course of my
                         visit. 2The electrophotographs showed the  Kir'.ian  effect  with  a  quality
                         almos-. equal to those produced by the         .,,]equipment.    Inaddition,
                                  i planted bean and  raddlsh  seeds  several  weeks  ago  which  are
                         being @rrown under artificial light in the laboratory. Half of  the  plant.%
                         will  be  treated  with  an  organophosphorus  pesticide  compound  (var6ying
                         concentration and t'Lme of exposure)  and  compared  with  a  control  group
                         of plants to determine if there are significant differences ir, the  Kirlian
                         signat-ire.

                            I can wr-i-te a formal tz-4-p re-oor-t if you -,tish but it would s:L-,.%pL- be a
                            rehash of the nateri-A" in t,LLts r?tport.  A4.@gh, @.he Qmartarly Report
                            and pl-a-.is -are -,;ritten as '@4' the -,nateria"- 2was to be presented to me in
                            that fashion d@aring @ny rece.@,, visi:bk. As a matter of fact they had a
                            maze of altern-itivea and i@h@it appaars in this report is the re!7-Lilt of
                            our no,-rversations. General ca-z@ients:  Replacement
                            of banifit:2  Pg-      1-@sas one of the ovic,,inal !Lnvestigators of   iw',Iien
                            he -was in Portland and has used It in the laboratory,: It= not surpx-ized
                            that they could only ccma up with two new concepts---a p,,reat many competent
                            people have considered the problem: The uyste-;7it analys&s2 wtu be simll=
                            to t@-iat which we prepared for the vlsual system- they qhou:Ld provide a
                            wort-.iwhile frame of reference when attemotiig to respond to fUe fightin,-.
                            requirenents or in undertak-tzi6- a systenaiie  researIch pro--ram in any one of
                            9the areas: I have  requested  the  no-cost  extension.
                            Dis=ss?
                                                                   IL

