                    ELECTRIC TRANSMITTING ORGANS AND DETECTION
                        PROCESS HYPOTHESES IN ELE- CTRIC FISHES
                                       4 February 1974
                    Most authors and scholars of electric fishes agree that:
                    1. The anatomy and physiology of the electric organs of different
                       species are diverse;
                    2  The diversity amohg species stronoly sugcest that the electric
                       orc,,an-electroreceptor system plays quite different roles in the
                       biology of different species.  But what is this role is not known
                       .as of today;
                   3. Some classification has been made with regard to their transmitting
                       electric oroan as follows:
                       a.  low resting frequency, high standard deviation of interval
     2                      lengths and respondino- to different kinds of stimuli with a
                           many-fold increase in frequency and amplitude of the sional
                           (for example, Gnathonemus petersii).,
                       b.  medium restin- frequency, medium standard deviation of
                           interval lengths, responding to some stimuli with a several-
                           fold increase in frequency (for example, Gymnotus carap6o),'
                       C.  medium frequency with little or no change in the repetition
                           rate of the siernal, but with the possibility to stop completely
                           the discharge (for example,, Gyi-nnarclius niloticus),

                       d.  hi-h restin- frequency with low standard deviation, respondin-
                             r.,>                                                        CP
                           to a few special stimuli with small shifts in repetition rate of
                           the signal (for example, Sternarclius albifrons),
                       e.  species with no known response to stimuli with chanae in
                2                                                               CD
                           the repetition rate of the signal.
                    4. The discharge of the electric organ has been found to be commanded
                       from a pacemaker center in the medulla, in most species studied
                       until now. (See Fio,. 1.) This train of impulses seems to be re-
                       layed 1:1 in a nucleus in the medulla and again in the electro2motor
                       neurons in the spinal cord to be passed through the spinal nerves
                       to the electric transmittino, organ.
                    Some electric fishes have a very elaborate array of electroreceptors.
             All electric fishes have other sensory receptors mostly part of the lateralis
             line system like: temperature receptors, mechanical receptors and water-
             displacement receptors.  These sensory receptors are located2 in the dermis.
             There are other sensory receptors non-related to the lateralis line like:
             acoustical receptors., chemical receptors,, olfactory receptors., taste receptors
             and in some electric fishes optical receptors (vision)' not to mention equilibrium
             and stabilizincr receptors.
                    All these sensory receptors, electric and nonelectric, may work
             separately or in accordance in a hybrid cross correlation information 2system
             used in social interaction, feeding, swimming and navicration, in offense or
             defense.  Because of the multiplicity of use the sensory system is very com-
             .plicated usin- neuronal preprocessin-s and discriminating filterin- systems,,
             delay-lines, etc.
                                               is
                    Some electric fishes use p, sive and/or ,tctive object detection systems.
             Th0ere .ire some marine and fresh-iv,,iter fishes which do not have any electric
             traiismittin- or,-an, but have ,in electroreceptor system.  (Marine sh,,irks lil:c:
                                               2

                                                                                      c
                                                            4
                                                                   ELECTR'C- 0 itr.Ati
                                                                                                'PA
                                                                           2              4Af.!,j -   f SIPE)
                                    Fig. 1. Connection between the pacemaker in the brain,
                                                    the relay nuclei, the electromotor neurons, the
                                                    electric transmittin- or-an and the electrore-
                                                                                       t=k    t:l
                           0                         ceptors in electric fishes.
                                                                                     3

              Neo-
                ,-,iprion brevirostris, Scilliorhinus canicula, a catfish: Plotosus  or  the
              eel An@,milla an@,uilla and freshwater fishes like Clarias.)
                      A classification of electroreceptors can be made  from  the  followincr
                                                                                           r>
              criteria:
                      1.  Autorhytmic2. This means  that  they  emit  a  very  low  amplitude
                          signal from less than one to a few  millivolts.  Depending  on  the
                          particular receptor class it can have a. low repetition rate  (less
                          than 100). a medium repetition rate (from 100 to  500)  or  a  high
                          repetition rate (from 500 to 3000),
                      2.  Nonautorhytmic.
  2            or we can divide them in:
                      3.  Synchronous.    This means that they respond  to  the  transmittina
                                                                                           =P
                          organ in case  of a stimulus with a nerve transmission spike rate
                          synchronized to the electric oraan.
                      4.  Nonsynchronous.
              Another classification could be used as:
          2            5.  Ampullary organs similar to or identical with the Lorenzini
                          amnulla which has a canal lined with a very hiah resistance
                          membr ne filled with a jelly  and  communicatincr  to  an  ampulla
                          with sensory orcrans.-- The jelly can be high, medium or low con-
                          ductive and accordingly beincr acid, neutral or basic.  There are
                          many kinds of 2sensory cell formation classes.
                      6.  Tuberous  or  mormyromasts,  mostly  not  directly  connected   to
                          the surface of the skin.  Every mormyromast may have one, two
                          or more sensory cells separately innervated and respondin- each
                          to different amplitudes (levels) of stimuli.
                      Maybe a more adequate classification would be one talcincr into account
              the 3stimuli to which these electroreceptors respond such as:
                                                  4

                     a.   Conductivity: conductinc,r or nonconductin,- objects, the level
                          of responi@e-bein- more or less proportional to their conductivity
                          factor;
                     b.   Direction: response of the sensory cells bein- conditioned to
                                                                      0
                          the fact that an object is directed toward or away from the fish;
2                     c.   Form: sharp ed-es will stimulate some receptors, others will
                          be stimulated by round or rounded objects;
                     d.   Movement: the chanae in position or form of an object will pro-
                          duce a m@@dulation of the autorhytmic impulses of some receptors
                          and will be sensed by the fish;
                     e.   Smoothness or Rouchness of objects could also constitute a criter2ia
                          of stimuli classification;
                     f.   Chemicals in the water may affect the electric receptors and
                          their response., we have proof for this.
                     Finally codina- can be a classification criteria. -Lissman and Machin.
             proposed a
                     1.  "Pulse-frequency-modulation" (like in Gymnarchus niloticus);
             Watanabe and Bullock proposed a
              2       2.  "Pulse-phase modulation" (like in Eicenmannia virescens);
             Szabo and HaaiNvara analyzed and sua,,crested three other kinds of codino-s:
                     3.   "Number cocl,:n-- mechanism" (like in gymnotidsas: Hypopomus
                          artedi),
                     4.   "Probability codin- mechanism" (like in gymotids as: Stern-,irchiis
                                            t>
           8               albifrons).,
                     5.   "Latency codin(r mechanism" (like in mormyrids as: Gnathoiiei-lius
                          petersii).
                                                5

                     Accordin- to the first hypothesis "Pulse-frequency modulation" sen-
             sory information should -be conveyed by the frequency of the sensory impulses
             dependent on the pulse of the electric dischar,-es.
                     The second hypothesis "Pulse-phase modulation" the sensory codincr
                                                                                        co
             is the result of time relation (the phase) on the2 sensory impulse followin- the
             electric organ discharo-e.
                                    t),
                     The third hypothesis called the "Number codino- mechanism" supposes
                                                                   t>
             that the intensity of the electric potential field is coded throuah a single electro-
             receptor fiber by the number of nerve impulses produced by each electric
           2  organ pulse.
                     In the number four hypothesis, called "Probability codina, mechanism,
             the coding is provided by the probability that each electric orcran impulse might
             initiate an impulse in the nerve fiber.
                     Finally the fifth hypothesis: "Latency coding mechanism" is explained
             by the fact that certain mormyrid electroreceptors permit a chanae in latency
             of impulses of the electric organ relate2d to the intensity of the current flowino-
             throucrh the receptor.  Therefore, the intensity of the potential field can be
             coded by the time relation betwee.n electric transmittincr organ discharge and
             sensory impulse, the time ranging being as much as 8 milliseconds.  For
             variations in the superthreshold field intensity this would be the only mech-
             anism for a sensory organ producing sinale spikes.  The place wher2e the
             latency-shift of the sensory impulse is takina place has not as yet unequivoc-
             ally explained.
                     It is worth meiitionin(, that there ,tre electroreceptors connected to
                                          t>
             nerve fibers which would not transmit any impulses without a specific stimulus.
             Otlier electroreceptors are related to ilerve fibers discli.,tr,-in- continuou4sly.
                                                                           t>
                                                6

             Some, when presented with stimuli, would increase their electric activity
             and others would decrease it.
                    The first type of fibers are called phasic fibers, the second type are
             called tonic fibers.  Electroreceptors connected to phasic nerve fibers are
             called phasic electroreceptors (i.e., tuberous orcrans = mormyromasts);
             electroreceptors connected to tonic fibers are called tonic electroreceptors6
             (i.e., ampullary or,-,ans like the Lorenzini ampulla).
                                                7

