                                                                                 . ... ....... . .
                       C)n Tuesday 26 January 19@h) SI aiid If e;q)crimenta@ion wid     i,esearch
                      c   i    out in I'tOOTri 20@ FUil(lillg 13, by I-iosri
                                                                        'S.
          2                                                                se
                                                          subjects:  1-iio
                                                                                  -p(,
                       The evening's sessi@i-i opened   with a standard   slo,,t      induction ijliich
                   was )ie&14 held for a cotisi.derable period of time in an    c Cfort . to produce
                   [;reater deptli in all perc;oris presetit.  Immediately after,  all   sul)jccts
                   were aiialcened and ariother induction iias rii.n acain maS-,inf,, every effort to,
                   obtain greatbr  daptli.  During  this  test  each  subject  was  instructed  to
                   opcn her eyes "and appear norm2al but remain in a deep brqiiee" state.  All
                   subjects succeeded in  obtaining  this  depth  without  ef.f'ort.  In  view  of
                   the.above suc8essful testing, a  tlirid  induction  vias  run--tliis  time  via
                   the telephone and usi.iig cotle words.  In this test, @11 subjects were
                   sucqessfully induc2ted and @rrotc- albrief statement  wiiilc,,  tinder  hypnosis
                   and still tall-,ing on the telephone and Llien carried otit a series of
                   activities inclurdi.ng wall<iliC-,, moving ab(-,uL., cLc. wliile still under full
                   hypnosis and then passi.ng into a deep sleep state without additional
                2   instnction.
                        For matter of record, numerpais post-h,,y-pnotic sui.,Cestions ,iere  tried in
                   connection with the above work and tests for ciept-li were tried.  All
                   successful.  As a special test on the subjects, all were Liven a simple
                   post-hypnotic coruiand for the next seswion.       This Pli was as soon as the
 6                  subjects enler the opcrations'room aiial seat Uilr-,mselvesi they will immedi-.-
                   ately pass into a sleep state.

