                                    THt SENSITIVITY AND RESPONSE
                                       OF WEAKLY ELECTRIC FISH
                                TO STATIC AND PULSED MAGLIMTIC FIELDS
                                             June 1, 1970

              I. ItiTRODUCTION.
                      The study of bioelectrocenesis, particularly --n the various  species  of
                 electric fish, has been of increasing scientific  concern  in  recent  years.
                 This interest stems primarily from the potential usefulness  of  research  in
                 this area in contributing to our understandina of  a  number  of  fundamental
                 and significant problems. By defining the  e2lectric  fish's  unique  sensitiv-
                 ity to electric and magnetic fields, and how it codes and utilizes such sens-
                 ory information in its detection and navigation  behavior,  current  evidence
                 is providing a more complete concept of  such  basic'questions  as  migration
                 and territoriality, and is leading toward the deve'Lopment of  various  bionic
                 devices in the form of underwater sensors and  power  sources.  In  ad2dition,
                 knowledge of the effects of magnetic and  electric  fields  on  physiological
                 and behavioral processes has assumed great importance in view  of  man's  ex-
                 posure to drastic changes in such stimuli during space travel.
                      Living things produce a changingelectric field at and  near  the  surface
                 of their bodies; all fish, being sheathed in a conductive substance and
                 living in a conduct2ive medium, produce an electric field that may be detect-
                 ed at relatively great distances. However, there are  certain  fi'sh  which
                 produce electric fields exceeding the norm by hundreds or thousahds of
                 degrees of magnitude. The electric eels of the  Amazon  can  'produce  bursts
                 in excess of 600 volts. Other electric  fish,  i.e.,  weakly  electric  fish,
                 produce continuous fields measured only in millivolts, but by  2means  of  in-
                 terpreting distortions in these fields are able to sense and navigate
                 through their environment to a degree comparable to  that  of  other  species
                 in which vision '@s used for these purposes.  The weakly electric fish,
                 having very poorly developed visual abilities, must depend  on  i,-Iformation
                 acquired through their electric fields in order to survive.
                      The mag-ie2tic field is a form of energy to which all plants  and  ani-
                 mals@are exposed.,  Its influence on living systems, however, is subtle
                 and not well understood. one approach to studying  the  effects  of  magnetic
                 fields upon behavior is through the use of an organism  which  produces  an
                 electric field and uses it as a detection  and  navigation  mechanism.  The
                 electric fish is just such an organism, and this report2 will  review  a  one-
                 year study of two of these species (Sternarchus albifrons and  S.  ler)tor-
                 hyachus; see Figure 1) which has just been completed
                                                          In these fish, impulses  are  dis-
                 charged from the tail and received by  the head, which  becomes  positive  in
                 regard to the tail. This potential difference  creates  an  electric  field
         2        about the fish's body, permitting it to detect  objects  through  distortions
                 in the field. Several studies have shown that these  fish  can  perceive  a
                 static (constant strength) magnetic field, but only  when  either  the  orga-
                 nism or the field is in motion, thus generating a current in the fish.
                 It was thought that the fish was responding to the current generated in
                 itself by the magnet. However, in these expe7riments the  magnetic  field  was
                 presented as a static field, and the sensitivity of the fish  to  a  pulsed
                 field presented at various frequencies, particularly the frequency at

              which the fish discharges its own electric field (500-1500 cps), was not
              investigated. Other investigators have shown dramatic increase  in  sensi-
              tivity to Ap2lied A.@g. approximating the frequency of the fish's discharge.
              In addition, the strength of the field was not systematically varied in
              terms of the gauss level in the fish's proximity.  Therefore,2 there are
              considerable gaps in our knowledge of the degree of sensitivity of the fish
              to magnetic fields at various frequencies and strengths.  The present stua-,v
              was undertaken to clarify sou,.e of these problems regarding the perception
              of and response to a magnetic field which is systematically  varied  along
              several continua.
                Figure 1. Ster-iarchus albifrons (t2op) and Ster-narchu evtorhvnchus (bottom)
                                                                 !us I
            IT. BACXGROLND.
                    Comparatively little work hag been done on the sensitivity of weakly
                electric fish to various types of electrical and magnetic fields, although
                the evidence that is available indicates that these fish have an extremely
                low threshold for such stimuli. Liss=nn2(1958) and  Lissmann  and  Macnin
                (1958), for example, have shown that gvmnarchus niloticus will  perce've
                the movement of a magnet or an electrified insulator when either is Moved
                outside its tank or aquarium.* A small bar magnet was held  against  the
                *Szabo et al. (1969) w-rite that the electzqreptors respond to both the
                presence and movement of an object or field.
  3                                                   2

                  wall of the  aquarium  and  mved  in  avertical  direction,  with  the  result  that
                  a "single  downward  sweep  produced  aresponse in the  fish  if  the  rrovemnt  was
                  sufficiently  rapid  and  the  distance between the fish and  the  magnet  suff-i-
                  ciently  small.  With  the   particular magnet used  a  response  could  be  elicited
                  at a velocity of  about  3  m/sec  when t2he fish was about 50 cm from the magnet"
                  (Lissmann  and  ifachin,  p.451).  When an  electrostatic  charge*  was  moved  hori-
                  zontally in front of the tank, the fish was seen to respond to a voltage of
                  60 kV when the distance from the fish was 50 cm and the charge was moved at
                  3 m/sec. The authors  conclude  that  Gvmnarchus  is  able  to  detect  potential
                  gradients of about 20.30/A@/cm  in  the  surrounding  water.  Table  1  shows  the
                  remarkable sensitivity of this species as compared to other fish.  It is
                  apparent that the perceptive ability  of  Gymnarchus  is  of  a  different  order
                  Table 1. The sensitivity of six species of fish to direct current. (After
                  Lissmann and Machin, 1958.)
                                                                      Current density
   2                                Species                              (,uA./cm.2)
                             Phoxinus  2h2Linus   (minnow)                    10
                             Cypriniis cardio (carp)                          60
                             C. auratus (goldfish)                            16
                             -ia@a-siiu-rus, asotus (catfish)               2   8  -
                             Ca@;-terosteus acut-eatus (stickleback)         110
                             2ymnarchus niloticus                        2 x 10-5
                  of magnitude than other fish.  Since it can detect     a direct  current  of   about
                  .15 microvolt per  centimeter,  an  individual  sense  organ  in  Gymnarchus  should
                  be sensitive to a current 2change as small as .003 micromicroampere.
                       Lissmann (1958) has observed that Gvmcrtus carat)o can be conditioned
                  to feed in response to a stationary permanent magnet mounted outside its
                  tank and to inhibit feeding  responses  when  the  magnet  is  absent.  He  notes
                  that although there is no sipecifically relevant data, it would seem that this
                  fish should be able to2 perceive a field  of  about  10  oersted  when  moving  at
                  a rate of 10 cm/sec.
                       In a subsequent paper by Machin and Lissmann (1960), it was shown that
                  the receptors responding to small direct currents were also used in the fish's
                  object detection and location.  That  is,  "the  sensitivity  of  the  fish  to  ex-
                  ternally applied  currents  gives  information  about  the  electric  recept2ors  for
                  object location 11 (Machin and Lissmann, p.802).
                  *A small aluminum cylinder on an insulated handle and charged from a
                  Wimshurst machine was used.
                                                          3

                 A.   liagnetic field effects.
                          The effects of various types of magnetic -.@ields on living organisms
                      has been a subject of increasing interest in recent years for both theo-
                      retical and practical reasons.  "Basically, the magnetic field, being a
                      form of energy, just as are light, heat and sound, impinges upon all liv-
                      ing or-anisms whether plant-2or animal.  The question as to its effect
                      on living matter is what we are seeking to learn.  Is it an active or
                      passive process?  How will an organism react tD an environment that is
                      devoid of a magnetic field?  Further, what will happen if the field is
                      altered or distorted?"  (Caldwell and Russo, 1968, p.233).
                          Caldwell and Russo studied the effects of an A.C. magnetic2 field
                      upon the behavior of the Italian honeybee (Lois mellifica), and found
                      that the bee would respond to the magnetic energy field with a stereo-
                      typed nodal reaction, i.e., three of the four subjects would situate
                      themselves and become riaidly fl-ated over one of the magnetic nodes
                      When the magnet was on.  Cottlieb and Caldwell (1967) investigated the
                      ma2gnetic field effects on the compass mechanism and activity level of
                      the snail Helisoma deyi endiscui.  Using a bar magnet with a weak field
                      (1.5 gauss), they obtained significant effects on the activity level of
                      the subjects.
                          Since astronauts have and will continue to be exposed to magnetic
                      fields -.4hich are much less intense than the Earth's magn2etic field while
                      exploring the surfaces of neighboring celestial bodies, "the question
                      arises as to whether the human body has during its evolution become de-
                      pendent on the presence of the Earth's magnet-r@c field for the maintenan,:e
                      of its normal functional integrity.  Accordingly, it has become most im-
                      portant to ascertain whether a low-intensity maanetic field exposure
2                      could pospibly lead to an impairment of health or performance of an in-
                      dividual" (Busby, 1967, p.7).  However, there is also the possibility
                      that astronauts Could be exposed to intermittently high-intensit-/ mag-
                      netic fields up to 1,000 gauss for varying periods during space travel.
                      Beischer (1963, 1969) and Beischer et al. (19672) have studied the ef-
                      fects of both low- and high-intensity fields on man and animals.  Their
                      results show that man does not seem to be affected by a two-week exposure
                      to 50-gama fields; mice survive a one-hour exposure to 120,000 gauss;
                      and in a low-intensity magnetic field, there is a significant gradual
                      decrease of the scotopic flicker fusion thres,iold in man.
          2                 Agalides has recently completed a series of studies on weakly
                      electric fish, including some work on their sensitivity to moving magnetic
                      fields.  Using GXmnarchus and Sternarchus as subjects, he observed that
                      they responded to a permanent bar maonet of 930 gauss.  The magnet was
                      moved at 3 m/sec and was perceived by the fish at a distance of 120 cm.
                      This was 0very close to the fish's sensitivity to static electric fields,
                      and corresponds to a gradient of 3 emu, or 0.03,tAV/cm.
                                                        4

                B.  Electrosensitivity
                        Granath et al. (1967) worked with Sternarchus albifrons in their ef-
                    fort to determine its sensitivity to imposed electric  fields.  To  study
                    the frequency response continuum, the authors used a  conditioning  prob-
                    lem in whizh both uniform and nonuniform alternating current (A.C.) fields
                    were employed as signals for the subjects 2to leave a porous cylinder and
                    swim to a vertical plastic tube for a food reward.  After the conditioned
                    response was established with high stimulus values, the  signal  was  re-
                    duced to daternine the threshold of the fish.  T@,e results indicated that
                    Sternarchus is most iensitive at its own discharge frequency at room temp-
                    erature, i.e., in the area of 1,000 cps, wit2h a  maximum  sensitivity  of
                    0.2 microvolts per cm.  However, a secondary maximum was observed at the
                    second harmonic of the discharge frequency.
                        Watanabe and Takeda (1963) employed the South American gy=atid,
                    Eigenmani , in their study of the effects of ekternally applied electric
                    current.  Like Granath et al., they found that the effective stimulus was
                    an2 alternating current presented at a frequency very close to that of
                    the fish's own discharge.  In this case, Bigennania has a discharge rate
                    of about 300 cps at 250C. Their results showed that  "when  a  sinusoidal
                    (or a square pulse) electric signal with a frequency similar to  that  of
                    the fish's own discharge is applied to the fish, the  latter's  discharge
                    frequency changes aG if to escape fro2m the applied signal frequency.  The
                    effectiveness of the stimulus depends on the difference  beween  the  two
                    frequencies (.!@S); whenZ@S is more thanlo cps the response is barely rec-
                    ognizable.  The smaller LS, the more effective the stimulus, except when
                    AS is very small, where the response again fails to occur" (Watanabe and
                    Takeda, p.65)
                        Dewsbu2ry, (1966b) believes that stimuli* differ  and interact in  the
                    kind and/or amount of change they induce in the  discharge  frequency  of
                    weakly electric fish.  Hie observed several different species, but not
                    Sternarchus albifrons  which does not appear to behave in this way.
                    Dewsbury attempts to relate his data to a concept of arousal, wherein
                    discharge frequency changes with arousal level.  In anot2her study (1966a),
                    he confirmed the hypothesis that electric organ  discharge  frequency  in
                    gymotids is higher in darkness than in liglit.  This  would  normally  be
                    expected, although we have not found such evidence in S. albifrons.
                         The effect of temperature on discharge frequency is  a  particularly
                    important problem in that'the exact nature of this relationship  must  be
  2                  knl-wn in order to establish baseline data for further study on the fish's
                    discharge behavior.  Gallon et al. (1967) and Enger and Szabo (1968) have
                    found that the rate of discharge varies with temperature in mor:nyrids and
                    *For example, light-darkness, shock, aeration, metallic  objects,  and  a
                    buzzer (Dewsbury, 1966c).
                                                       55

                                    gymnotids,   Their results are summarized in Figures 2 and 3.
                                                              I 0-        030/20 2 2 03
                                                                     02
                                                           Lli            030120   2..i-
                                                                      2             0
                                                               12-
                                                                     G3
                                                                          030/20 a? 4 6
                                                              1
                                                                6-     0
                                                                 t
                      2                                                20          25           30
                                                                             TEMP. "C
                                    Figure 2. Discharge rate as a  function of temperature.   Open circles,  as-
                                    cending series;  filled circles,  return to lower temperature;  triangle,
                                    second ascending measureuznt.  (After Gallon et al.,  1967.2%,
                                                             2000
                                                                                               Gioll L3
                                                                5m
                                                                                               a
                                                            06                                 Sternapylus
        2                                                    E
                                                                                                Increasing te".
                                                                                                Decreasing terr4,)@
                                                                   20     25     30     35    IC
                                    Fisure 3. Relation between water temperature and di1scharge rate.   Open
                                    circles,  increasing temperatures; closed circles,  decreasing temperatures;
                                    broken lines, Qlo- values  for comparison.  (After Enger and Szabo.  196a.)

                        Attem@)ts have also been made to condition the discharge rate of
                   morntyrids with both classical and operant methods.  Mandriota et al. (1965)
                   report that three species of Mormvridie would  briefly  increase  their  dis-
                   charge frequency (conditioned response) in  response  to  light  (conditioned
                   stimulus) following training trials in which light  was  p2aired  with  shock
                   (unconditioned stin-,ulus). Mandriota et al. (1966)  later  discovered  that
                   operant (avoidance) conditioning was also effective in these fish and,
                   in fact, was uiore efficient than classical conditioning  in  that  fewer
                   shocks were required to establish the response.
           111. CUR-RENT STUDY: THE SENSITIVNY AND RESPONSE OF STERNARCEUS ALBIFRO'tqS TO
                STATIC AND PULSED 14AGIqETIC FIELDS,
                A. Problems and hypotheses.
                        Tl,.e prixaary hypotheses of this study were concerned with the  problem
                   of determining whether weakly electric fish  are  sensitive  to  magnetic
                   fields and, if so, how this sensitivity might vary as the field is changed
                   from a static to an alternating and to 2a pulsed one,  as  the  frequency  of
                   the field is increased or decreased in relation to the normal discharge
                   frequency of the subject, and as the strength of the  field  is  varied.,  A
                   secondary problem conceined with effects of various drugs on the elertrical
                   activity of the fish was also investigated.  H(xiever,  before  the  data
                   could be collected, it was necessary to find a 2source from which weakly
                   electric fish could be obtained, develop  life-support  systems  for  the
                   subjects, and design and construct the  required  equipuent  and  apparatus.
                   le  Subjects.
                            A total of 18 fish were purchased, consisting of 9 Sternarchus
                       albifrons, 6 S. le2torhvnchus, and 3 weakly electric fish of an un-
                       known species.  Most of t2he specimens were bought from the Cappet
                       Corporation in Alexandria, Virginia, and a few from local pet shops.
                       Four of the fish, all S. altbjifr., remained  healthy  during  the  peri-
                                                I.L.trons
                       od of the study, and were the only ones used in  the  final  experiments.
                       Viair size Is shown in Table 2. Wit2h  few  exceptions,.the  others  died
                       within one week of purchase,
                            Table 2, Size of the four experimental S. albifrons.
                                         $,4bjict         Length
                                         lish  #1         18  cm
                                         Fish  #2         21  cm
                                         Fish  #3         14  cm
                              7           Fish  #4         11  cm
                                                       7

                          The subjects were kept in individual tanks of either 14  or  20
                     liter capacity. The water was aerated with  conventional  air  pumps
                     working through ctiarcoal and glass wool filters. I'he  temperature
                     was maintained at about 26.SOC and the pH at 6.7 to  6.9.  Food  con-
                     sisted of either live or dehydrated brine shrimp. The  fish  were  fed
               2      2 - 3 titres a day, and once a week an antibacterial agent was  added
                     to the water to suppress the growth of bacteria.
                 2. Equipment and apparatus.
                          A plastic Y maze (Figure 4) was constructed for tests  with  the
                     the static or steady ma@netic field. Its three arms  were  joined  at
                     angles of-1200, and the maze itself made of 0.04011 sheet styrene
                 2    fastened with styrene solvent. The water in the maze  was  drawn  from
                     a continuously aerated and filtered source with a pH of 6.8  and  a
                     temperature of 26.80C. It was exchanged every @  hour,  within  which
                     tirrie the temperature drop was approximately 0.20C. However,  because
                     of its inadequate size, this maze proved unsatisfactory,  i.e.,  the
                     larger subjects co2uld not be used in it. In addition,  with  a  magnet-
                     ic field of 8-10 gauss and the magnet centers at the distal  end  of
                     one test arm, a minimum field of 2 gauss was present at  the  farthest
                     point in the starting chamber. The field was 4 gauss in  the  area  of
                     the fish's head when the subject was released from the  starting  cham-
                     ber.  These problems with the Y maze may have contributed 2to the
                     failure to find any response by the fish to the magnetic  field  in
                     the initial experiments.
                          A larger T maze (Figure 5) was then designed  and  constructed
                     in an attempt to demonstrate a more positive response to one  arm  at
                     the choice p@,.int with the magnetic field as a cue. In the Y  maze,
                     the subject appeared to swim into the arm on the side of  the  2starting
                     chamber that the fish was closest to when the door to  the  starting
                     area was opened. The length and depth of the T-maze  arms  were  much
                     greater than those of the Y maze, permitting the use of  the  largest
                     specimens. This maze was also provided  with  continuous  filtration
                     and heating. It had a 10-liter capacity,'with  an  auxiliary  16-liter
                     and 50-2watt heater. An air lift and siphon were  arranged  so  that
                     heated, filtered water was slowly and continuously fed into  the  leg
                     of the T from the tank. A return siphon ran from the  distal  end  of
                     each arm to the auxiliary tank. Temperature in the maze  was  held  at
                     26.8'C by maintaining the temperature in the external tank  at  32.50C.
                     The tank and siphons were wrapped with paper 2lagging  and  jacketed
                     with aluminum foil to achieve and hold the  desired  temperature.  The
                     maze itself was made of kll sheet clear acrylic plastic, joined  with
                     an appropriate solvent. The material proved to be  light  and  strong,
                     and permitted good observation of the fish.
                          The magnets were made by winding 5 pounds of #12  copper  magnet
                     wire on each of 2 alu8minum tins of 23 cm diameter. When  in  use,  the
                                                    8

                                              POWER SUPPLY
                                              6-12 volt
                                              20-10 Arnp.
                                              battery eliminator
           Y-MAZE
     Constructed of.040" sheet styrene
           Water In-the maze drawn and replenished
           half-hourly from 80-degree F-7. 9 piff
           source. Temp2erature loss la the Interval
           negligible.
                                                    STIMULATOR
                                                    9 volt 22 mA@n
                                                    thru stialnless steel
                                                    electrodes
           Figure 4.  The plastic Y maze shown   with the equiprent (tuagnets. power supply and stimulator) used in tests
     6      of the static magnetic field.

                                                                v eE o n=
                                                                version of
                                                                 "rs d vo]
                                                           cm:indtjc:e  ive
                                @@7.5cm@@-15cmE,8                 ced wave 30cm                45cm
                                                          @c m
                               4L
                            ma net
                                                     10cm
                                                                         0.24V  0.2V   8OmV    -12mV    -5mV
                                                                          24G   2OG     8G      -1.2G    -5G
     2        Distribution of 14agnetic Field'                                        Voltages shown are those i@,luced
                                                  41
             and form of induced puise in                                            in a 300 turn test coil of 3cm dii
             tb,e Electric Fish Tee Maze.-
                                                       25cm
                                               2                                         @2@Smvp2e5'G
                                                                                            16mV, 1.6G
                                                                       5 cm. (110 Io         5niV,0.5G
                                                           7@5@               dep
                                                           a__                    cm)
 1                                                    6=7                         th
                                       3.  'Ahe      mnd the             of -t@%,z       @4"lene, '-,n It.

                      2 coils were wired in series and placed on either side of  the  maze
                      arm, 13 cm apart.
                           The discharge patterns of the fish were recorded by  means  of
                      probes of pure carbon rod.  Above the water level, these probes were
                      shielded in thickwall aluminum tubing. Shielded cable  was  used  to
                      connect the probes with the oscilloscope  input.  The  oscilloscope
2                      was a TEKTRONIX 502 A. and the built-in prcamp was found to  be  suf-
                      ficient to record these fish at distances over 50 cm, which exceeded
                      oixr needs for these experiments. In recording, the  probe  shields,
                      the cable shields, and the scope ground were all connected to a doub-
                      le wrap of heavy aluminum foil arounl the chamber containing the fish.
                      With this 2arrangement the "noise" level on the system was  held  to
                      0.3 mV, which was-acceptable.
                           The electrical equipment which surrounded the  experimental  ap-
                      paratus was a source of an electrical noise electromotive force
                      (E'MF) wiich drove current through the input resistor  R    I  of the
                                                                           IP  input$
      2                measuring device (in this case an oscilloscope).. The  noise  power
                      dissipated in such an input resistor is a constant, Pn, so the noise
                      voltage developed at the input of the scope is
                                           Vn=FPnRi.,ut     (1)
                      and therefore by reducing the input impedance "Rinputo noise voltage
                      is reduced.  The network shown in Figure 6 reduc2ed the input impedance
                      of the oscilloscope from its usual value of 1 @leoohm to 20  kilo-ohm
                                                                      0
                      and allowed the input imped3nces for the two separate beams  to  be
                      balanced in order to eliminate any assymmetries in the external net-
                      work. The noise improvement achieved by this method is  a  factor  of
       2               7; the measuremnts were not affected since the impedance of the
                      source electrodes and tank was about 500 ohms.  As long as the source
                      impedance is low with res@ect to the input impedance of the masuring
                      device che source is not affected by the measurements.
                           The operation of the device is straightforward.  After  all  of
                      the shields have been conn2ected, the 40K potentiometer  is  adjusted
                      until the noise on both beams of the oscilloscope is minimized.
                      This is the bes't operating point.
                          The distribution and strength of the magnetic field were determ-
                      Lned with a test coil of 300 turns, 15 mm in diameter.  'The  induced
                      electromotive force.(EMF) was converted into a field strength measure-
                   3   ment in gauss by application of Faraday's law
                                                EHF         (2)
                                                      dt
                      ,where  is the magnetic flux through the circuit.  Equation (2)
                      says that the E@IF induced in a circuit is equal to the rate of change
                      of the riagnetic flux through the circuit.  The magnetic flux is

                                                                  Beam #1 input.
            to electrode
                                                            1 m
                          40 K                                       Oscilloscope
           to electrode
               #2
                                                            I m
              shiela
                                                               Beam #2 input
6
                          Figure 6. Input impedence'reduction network.
                                                12
                                                as

<<OCR Error  --  Unable to read TIFF image>>
                     been added.  By varying the voltage output of the power supply, the
                     voltage output at the si-nal generator, and by careful adjustment of
                                             0
                     a variab:e bias-resistor at the simnal input to the transistor "switch",
                                                       0
                     a pulsed field of the desired characteristics was achieved.
                          The2 circuit schematic is shown in Figure 7.  The circuit consists
                     of four npn transistors, three of which ('/'2N3055) switch all of the
                     current through the magnet, and one (#ZN3054) receives the signal from
                     the signal generator (Lafayette #99-5014) and drives the three power
                     transistors.  The resistors in the circuit are bias resistors and the
                     capa2citors tend to round off the switchin- ptilses and prevent oscilla-
                     tions.
                          When'the sinxisoidal signal from the signal generator goes posi-
                     tive the transistor switch turns on and the current flows from the
                     12V poi;er supply through the magnet.  When the signal reaches the
                     negative portion of its cycle, the switch turns off and current is
                  2   prevented from flowing.  By putting in a 1000 Hz signal we therefore
                     put 1000 pulses per second through the magnet with a maximum of 12 amps
                     peak current.  The actual current through the magnet is considerably
                     less since the inductance increases the im-pedarce.
                          The transistors dissipate a great deal of power and must be
                     placed on heat sinks in order to oper2ata properly and to prevent
                     thermal failure.
               B.  Experiment 1:  Temperature-frequency baseline data.
                       We had observed that the discharge frequency of each fish at a given
                   temperature was different from that of the other fish.  Agalides reports
                   that temperature-related frequency changes in 'S. albifrons-are complex,
                   but are on the order of A50 cps/&CO, which our work confirme2d.  Since
                   the current experiuents required an accurate prediction of discharge
                   frequency, a study was made of the temperature-frequency relationship
                   in the fish in order to provide baseline  data.
                       Each fish was monitored for frequency at '10-12 points in the 21 to
                   310C range and over a period'of 6 weeks.  The test chamber was a plastic
                   box 25 x 43 x 20 cm, double wrappe2d on the exterior with heavy aluminum
                   foil.  Three liters of water were drawn from the test fish's home tank
                   and placed in the box.  Temperature variations were achieved with a heat
                   exchanger made from a plastic pitcher and a length of plastic tubing.
                   The tubing was coiled in the pitcher, which was filled with either hot
                   or cold water.  Water from the test apparatus was forced through the
                2   tubing at such a rate as to change its temperature 1OC/15 min.  When the
                   desired change was achieved, as determined by an electric thermotreter,
                   2 minutes were allowed to elapse, and then the frequency of the test fish
                   was recorded.  Before recording, the sensing thermistor of the thermometer
                   was removed from the apparatus because it introduced extraneous signals
                   into the water and, thus, i8nto the oscilloscope used for frequency de-
                   terminations.  Fifteen-minute observation periods indicated that frequen-
                   cy always stabilized in less than 2 minutes.
                                                     14

                                                                                      Magnet
               +12 v
                                     150K
                                                                                         3055
                                                                                                 @Ilt4
                                                                                 055
          3i9gnal
              input
                                             3054
                                                                       055
                    *Note: The'2N3055's may     be  replaced by the more costly,
                             SK3027
                               Figure 7. Schewtic of magnet switching circuit.
                                                      15

                      A series of observations with the fish maintained in  close  fitting
                 rigid styrene tubes showed no variations in either che amplitude  or  the
                 phase relationships of the discharge accompanyina the change in frequen-
                 cy.  These results are not in keeping with those of Agalides, who reports
                 aviplitude changes.
                      Within the limits of accuracy of our test situation, we fo2und these
                 fish to have straight-line plots of temperature-frequency  response  with
                 a range of +15 to +50 cps at any given point, depending on the fish.
                 Whether thi7s varia7tion resulted from individual differences or  variability
                 in the method is not known, jut the experimenters lean toward the latter
                 interpretation. Our laboratory was by no means  2terrperature  controlled,
                 and the fish may have been responding to changes in temperature over the-
                 entire apparatus, which was not apparent in the small area actually
                 sampled for temperature. The results of  this  experiment  are  shown  in
                 Figure S.
              C. Experiment 2: Response to unpulsed magnetic fields in the Y maze.
                 1. &nvironmental preference using a static magnetic field.
2                         The equilateral Y maze was initially used in an attempt to dem-
                      onstrate a sensitivity to a relatively strong static magnetic  field
                      in the sirall specimns of S; albifrons and S. leotorhvnchus.  It
                      was thought that these fish, with electric iields having a maxi
                      potential as observed in our lab of only 6.2 m volt, and an  ability
                      to detect one an2other by mans of these fields at  distances  exceed-
                      ing 1 meter, would respond.(a) to changes in this field  induced  by
                      • large magnet, or (b) to currents induced in their bodies  by  such
                      • magnet. However, no gross responses from the  fish  were  observed
                      in either swi=ing behavior or in electrical discharge  pattern  when
                      the magnetic coils were arranged so that a magnet2ic field calculated
                      at 9- 10 gauss was centered in a 40 x 20 x 30 cm aquarium  iA  which
                      a fish had been previously placed.  Consequently the Y maze was used-
                      for further experimentation.
                          The dimensions of this maze allowed relatively low levels of the
                      magnetic field in the first 5 cm of the experimental arm with inten-
                      sity increasing to a maximu2m of 9 - 10 gauss at 11.5.cm.  The overall
                      dimensions of the apparatus allowed minimal swirmning room for the  four
                      smallest fish: two albi,frons and two leptorhynchus 15 - 15.5 cm  in
                      length.
                          The current induced ove-r a short distance in the environment by
                      a standard 9-volt transistor radio battery proved to be a noxious stim-
     0                 ulus, and electrodes were installed at the starting point in  the  event
                      that subjects did not move rapidly to the choice point.
                          The subject was placed in the starting arm and a  short  period  al-
                      lowed to elapse. Both experimental species  were  passive  fish  and
                                                    16

          TEMPERATURE-FREQUENCY REIATIONSHIP
   Z9     PLOTS FOP. FOUR STERNARCHUS ALBIFRONS                                                                                           Amok
   !8
   t7
      -26-.8-
   t6
                                  2                                                  s                              3
   t5
   !4
   @3      6                           0                6       800                       v 0                       1000
                                                     FITEQUENCY Or DISCIIARGE    CPS
                                Figure 8. 'A"he disc,%zrge grequency-te,.iioerctLirp-

                       short-accomodation periods of about one  minute  were  sufficient  before
                       the door to the choice point was opened.  The  subject  was  allowed  2
                       seconds to move to the choice point. If this  had  not  occurred  at  2
                       seconds, the experirentor made contact in the stimulator circuit.
                       Out of 120 trials, this was necessary only about 10% of the tim ip
          2             largely with one particular  fish.  Stimulation  once  initiated  was  -
                       maintained through the trial. Tne fish  is  not  greatly  affected,  if
                       at all, except in the area directly between the electrodes, but in
                       order to control the possible effects of  other  variables,  this  tech-
                       nique was used.
                            The magnet was kept at the left arm, and was left on for 10
        2               trials, off for  10 trials, and then on for a final  10.  After  a  trial
                       the fish was allowed to return to the starting  chamber  by  the  process
                       of blocking the unoccupied choice arm, waiting till the fish had
                       moved from the other arm, blocking it, and  then  blocking  the  start-
                       ihg chamber as the fish returned to it  during  normal  exploratory  be-
                 2      havior.  These fish are nocturnal and exhibit continuous searching
                       during the dark hours. The  hours  preceding  ard  during  experimental
                       sessions were dark with only low  level  red  illumination.  The  inter-
                       val bet-deen trials was thus variable, but the fish was kept in an
                       unexcited state.  Elapsed time for 30 trials was about 30 minutes.
                            T'L2ie results of this series of tr@.als (Table 3) indicated no  sig-
                       nificant preference or aversion for the stati,c magnetic field,  al-  --.
                       though the subjects did tend to turn left in  the  maze.  The  mean  per-
                       centage of left turns with the magnet off was 52%,  and  with  the  mag-
                       net on 54.3%.
                                    Table 3. Preference trials in the Y 2maze'
                                          with the static  magnetic  field.
                                              Choices to the left
                                           (Magnet on the left arm)
                                     Magnet on      Magnet off     Magret on
                       Fish          10 trials      10 trials      10 trials
                       S.A.31             30%           50%            60%
              2         S.A.4              40%           50%            40% (magnet off)
                       S L  22            50%           60%            70%
                       S:L:3              70%           60%            60%
                       'nis  fish required stimulation  on the  lst  trial.
                       2This fish required stimulation  10 times (3,4,3 distribution)
                    2. Co2nditioned response to the static  magnetic field.,
                            In a futther attempt to obtain some  indication  that  S.  albifrons
                       is sensitive to a non-pulsed magnetic  field,  a  conditioning  technique
                       was used in which the presence of the field (conditioned stimulus)
                       was paired with electric shock (unconditioned stimulus).
                                                       18

                         The S was selected on the basis of size, i.e.,  the  most  suitably
                    sized fish for the experir,.ental chamber, which consisted of one  arm
                    of the plastic water-filled Y maze.  Electric  shock  was  administered
                    from a 9-volt battery through electrodes fastened to the  walls  of  the
                    chamber. The two magnets were placed on either side  of  the  arm  and
                    activate2d by an 8-volt, 9-amp power source.
                         When the fish was placed in the chamber, the magnetic field
                    (9 - 10 gauss) was turned on, and k second later,  the  electric  shock
                    was administered for a period of one second, at which  point  both  stim-
                    uli were turned off. The S responded in  a  characteristic  manner  to
                    the shock with a "startle" reaction  (unconditioned  response).  I2t  was
                    hoped that after a sufficient number of trials the S would respond
                    (conditioned response) in this way to the magnetic  field  alone,  or,
                    when both stimuli were used, would anticipate the presentation of
                    shock by responding to the field in the initial 12-second interval.
                    However, after four series of 25 trials each, giving a  total  of  100
                    trials, the S fail2ed to show any response to  the  magnetic  field.  Con-
                    sequently, there was no indication that the fish was  able  to  perceive
                    the non-pulsed magnetic field.
                 3. Conditioning with the magnets at reduced intensities.
                         S. albifrons #3 was confined to one arm of the Y maze.  Two
                    electrodes were fixed to the sides of this arm, and  the  magnets  placed
                    on either side. In 2contrast to the first  experiment  in  this  series,
                    the magnets received only 4 volts and 4.8 amps from  the  power  supply,
                    producing a magnetic field of considerably less  intensity  (3@  gauss)
                    than that used previously. In the first experizrent,  the  fish  failed
                    to respond to the magnetic field, i.e., it gave no  evidence  of  sens-
                    ing the field at full strength, and it was decide2d  to  attempt  another
                    test with the field at half strength on the possibility  that  the  orig-
                    inal was too strong, thereby interfering with the fish's afferent
                    processes.  With the fish confined to one arm of the maze, the =gn@tic
                    field was turned on for a period of two seconds, and  after  the  first
                    second, e'-ectric ahock ( gvolts, 200/tfi@m2) was a2dministered to  the
                    subject for one second. At the end of two seconds,  both  the  field  and
                    shock were turned off. As expected, the fish  responded  to  the  shock
                    (uncondit-'-oned stimulus) with a "startle" movement (unconditioned  re-
                    sponse), but after 50 trials, when the field  (conditioned  stir-ulus)
                    was used by itself, there was no  anticipatory  conditioned  respo2nse.
                    It appears that the fish did not sense the magnetic field as presented.
                         A second series of 50 trials were then run with  S.  albifrons  #4
                    with the magnetic field power source at 2 volts and  1.8  amps.  The  re-
                    sults, however, continued to be negative. But over  the  course  of  the
                    ttials, both fish showed sme habituation to  the  electric  shock,  which
                 2   had b en reduced with a recalibration of the variable  resistor  to  100
                   ,,RA/cm at 9v for the second set of trials.
                                                   19

                        D. Experimnt 3: Drug study.
                               In contrast to various reports in the literature on other gyrmotid
                         fish, no stimuli to which Sternarchus would normally be exposed were
                         found to affect their discharc,e frequency.  Such things as noise, physi-
                         cal manipulation, light, dark, feeding, starvation and illness failed to
                         change ,he f2reque-.icy of the fish in the current study.  As we have seen,
                         frequency  changes  with  temperature  in  a  highly  predictable   manner,   and
                         Watanabe and Takeda (1963) demonstrated a response to applied AC current.
                         They found that AC at the fish's own frequency caused the fish to alter
                         his  own  frequency  in  response.  The  greatest   relative   changes   occurred
               2          when the applied current was closest to the fish's own frequency.
                               In an  effort  to  determine  the  degree  of  stability  and  control  the
                         fish  is able to maintain over its discharge frequency, a study of the
                         effects of various drugs on their discharge patterns'was undertaken.  Two
                         depressants, Nembutal (sodium pentobarbital) and Pontocaine (tetracaine
                         hyd2rochloride), and L-dopa (levodopa) were tested.
                               Nembutal at 750 mg/liter anesthetized the fish with no effect on
                         the  amplitude  ot  frequency  of  their  discharge.  The  L-dopa   effects   are
                         discussed separately; they did not shoir a direct effect on frequency.
                         Pontocaine, however, modified the fish's discharge frequency.  At a con-
                         centratio2n of 3 m- in 500 ml water, the discharge rate dropped  140 cps.
                         Twenty minutes after a final total dose ofl.12 Sms/500 ml, the discharge
                         was 375  cps  below  the  expected  level.  The  fish  rested  on  its  side  and
                         vas unresponsive to stimuli.  At this time, the amplitude and phase re-
                         lationships of the discharge were unaltered.  The results are summarized
                         in2 Table 4.
                               Table 4. The effects of   Pontocaine on discharge frequency.
                                                        rugge@         Norma
                                                              'c2y    Frequency
                         Tim      Dose        Tem;i. _lfrequen                           Remarks
                         09:25   0.375,cm     27.                            10
            2                                                          980 +
                          "Zi:30              27.5       839
                         09:37   0.375gm
                         09:43                27.35      787          965 + 30
                         09:45   0.375gm
                         09:51
                         09:56                27.2       649          955 + 30
                         10:02            9                                          200 ml water re-
                                                                                    placed   with   fresh,
                                                                                    fish letl--largic
                         10:08                27.1       575          950 + 30
                      -io .  i-i                                                    fish lying still

                         In view of the considerable interest in the neurotropic drug levod'opa
                    (L-dopa), and because the experimental techniques developed in the current
                    study are capable of providin- direct telemetric evidence  of  nervous  sys-
                    tem functions, it was decided to test L-dopa on selected  fish  in  order
                    to determine its effects on their electrical discharge  patterns  and  be-2
                    havior.
                         The first subject was S.A.,';-4, who received the drug for 27 days.
                    Long exposure to relatively large doses is necessary  to  produce  behavior-
                    al effects in other species. A technique of  repeated  injections  as  one
                    way of achieving this was ruled out as impractical;  therefore,  a  method
                    for dissolving L-dop4 into the aquarium water  was  2worked  out.  Dar7  pro-
                    vided by the'manufacturer of the drug (Iloff,-nann-LaRoche) indicated that
                    L-dopa is not very soluble in water; approximately 0.4%  at  800F.  An  air-
                    lift was arranged to bubble aquarium water from the 20  liter  home  tank
                    at a very slow rate through a chamber containing the  drug  and  lined  with
                    filter paper. The charco2al was removed  from  the  tank's  filter.  Every
                    day, weekends excluded, 100 mg of the drug on fresh filter paper was
                    placed in the dispenser. lie found that L-dopa,  under  these  conditions,
                    rapidly combined with other substances present to form a heavy, dark,
                    flocculent precipitate, which clogged the tank filter and the filter
                    paper in the dispenser.  The principal change was a conversio2n of the
                    dopamine to melanin, which was later prevented by the addition  of  50  mg
                    of ascorbic acid every time L-dopa was added.  S.A.#3  also  received  the
                    ascorbic as a control.
                         No unusual behavior or alteration-in the form or  amplitude  of  the
                    electrical discharge of S.A.44 were noted for  14  days.  Then  an  increas-
                    ing disorientation, reduced abi2lity to find  food,  and  abnormal  discharge
                    frequencies were noted. On the 21st day of  drug  experimentation  a  tho-
                    rough series of temperature-frequency studies was performed  in  the  pre-
                    viously described manner.  These revealed that the slope of the temperature-
                    frequency plot was unchanged, but whereas a variability of +  50  cps  had
                    been previously noted, varia2bility was now found to be + 150  cps  as  test-
                    ed over a period of 3 consecutive days. The drug  was  s@opped  at  the  end
                    of this time, the water in the tank changed,  and  charcoal  filtration  re-
                    sumed. Four days after-t:his, the temperature response  was  still  quite
                    erratic. The next close evaluation came 50 days  after  cessation  of  the
                    drug. Temperature-freque2ncy response at this time  had  returned  to  the
                    pre-drug parameters.
                         The cotitrol, receiving ascorbic acid alone,-showed  no  such  effects.
                         S.A.#2 was given L-dopa and ascorbic acid over  47  days.  The  dis-
                    penser in this case was a plastic funnel suspended with  the  narrow  end
                    of the cone submerged; discs of filter paper, folded in  half  twice  and
       2             opened to form a cone lined the funnel. Fifty mg each  of  dopa  and  as-
                    corbic acid were placed into the cone and were dispersed  by  simple  dif-
                    fusion over a period of 2 days. This was  a  more  reliable,  less  trouble-
                    som method of dispensing the drug than that  used  earlier.  In  this  case,
                    the tank filtration was left intact, but the air flow to the bubbler
                                             2         21

                    was reduced, lessening the water floi4 throu-h the charcoal.  We assumed
                                                              0
                    that with an undissolved supply of the drug at hand, an equilibrium would
                    be achieved, and the amount of drug in the water would be constant despite
                    uptake by the fish and/or the charcoal.
                         Several tests were tried, removing the fish thro2ugh 2 changes of dis-
                    tilled water which had been aereated and brought to the proper condition
                    with reagent grade chemicals, to test for metabolized dopamine with fer-
                    ric chlor-'@do.  However, there were no differences demonstrated in the
                    color or quantity of precipitate betweer. experinental and control fish.
                         S.A.#2, during and after 47 days on the drug, showed no al2tered be-
                    bavior and no change-in his electric field.
                         The drug studies were terminated at this point.  The exact cause of
                    S.A.#4's reactions are not definitely known.  Because of his sma.11 size,
                    the drug may have had more effect on him than on S.A.#2.  He may have
                    suffered an illness, or been affected by a toxic buildup of some sub-
                    stance or substances 2due to a lack of filtration in his tank for 27 days.
                                                                            "2's tank may have
                    Another possibility is that the operating fi:lter in S.A.,r
                    reduced the concentration of L-dopa below an effective level.
                 E. Experimnt 4: Response to AC and  pulsed magnetic fields in the T maze.
                    1. Conditioning of the sixty-cycle field.
       2                     The acrylic plastic T maze was prepared and the apparatus suitably
                         modified to initially produce an alternatin- magnetic field and later
                         a pulsed, but unidirectional field.  A new line of investigation was
                         then undertaken.  We were now able to change the intensity of the mag-
                         netic field over a considerable ran-e frcm-i 0 to over 50 gauss with a
                2         simple adjustment of a variable AC ("Variac") transformer, or 0 - 20
                         gauss with the DC power source.  The AC field was pulsed at the 60-
                         cycle commercial frequency; the previously described circuit allowed
                         the DC field to be pulsed from 0 - 1500 cps with no directional change.
                         in the field.  The chan,,es in frequency and intersity could be made
  2                       concurrently, although the complete range of intensities could not be
                         achieved at every frequency.
                             The first trials were run with a 60 cps AC mgretic field at 6
                         intensity levels (see Table 5).  S.A.#3 was placed in the T maze, with
                         the two magnets encircling one arm.  The intensity of the magnetic
                         field in that arm Fas var2ied by adjusting the voltage on the Variae.
                         Freqt@ency was maintained at a constant 60 cps.  At 41 gauss (50 volts),
                         the fish was given 250 trials (on alternate trials, the field was turned
                         on and off).  'When the field was on, each time the subject entered
                         the experimental arm of the maze it was shocked briefly.  With the field
                         off, 2the S could enter and swim in the arm freely.  It was hoped that
                         in this way, i.e., by conditioning the S to avoid the field as an avers-
                         ive stimulus by pairing it with shock, evidence could be obtained as
                         to whether the fish was sensitive to the field.  If candi tioning was
                         achicved, then it would be definite that the S could perceive magnetic
                         stim-ili, and its threshold for such stimuli determined by lowering the
                                                      22

                       intensity of the field.  The first tests (250 trials) were made at
                       41 gauss. Aftc-.r 100 trials at this level, the  fish  never  entered
                       the arm with the field on, but swam into it when  the  field  was  off.
                       Twenty trials were then attempted at 34, 36, 18@ 9 and 1 gauss,
                       with similar positive results at  the  three  higher  setting2s.  How-
                       ever, at 9 and 1 gauss, behavior became inconsistent,. with @z!%e S  re-
                       sponding correctly about half the time.
                         Table 5. Sixty--cps trials at intensities from 1 to 41 gauss.
                                    Intensity       No. of trials       Results
                                    41 gatiss             250        Positive   response
                                    34  ga2uss             20         Positive   response
                                    26  gauss             20         Positive   response
                                    18  gauss             20         Positive   response
                                                                     Partially positive
                                     9  gauss             20               response
                                                                             ly PO,@ic2ive
                                     1  gauss             20
                                                                             sp-onse
                    2. Conditioning of variable-frequency fields.
                             In each series of  these  trials the intensity  of  the  magnetic
                        field was held constant while frequency was  varied  by  changes  of
                        100 cps from 500 cps below the fish's  (S.A.#3)  own  frequency  to
                        500 cps above it (Table 6).  A total of 1100 trials were run, 100
                        at eaci frequency. The method used was  similar  to-that  of  the  pre-
                        vioils experiment. That is, the field was turned on  and  off  on  al-
                        ternate trials during each series of 100, and  each  time  the  fish
                        went i2nto the arm of the maze with the field  on  it  was  shocked.
                        When the field was off, no shock was  used.  The  results  in  each
                        case were negative; the fish did not learn to  respond  to  the  field
                        as a noxious stimulus as we had expected on the basis of previous
                        results, but tended to enter and stay in  the  field  regardless  of
                        the shock. Thus, the field seemed  to  have  son*  posit2ive  reinforce-
                        ment value to the fish. This  surprising  outcome  was  checked  in
                        another series of 300 trials with S.A.#3,  100-at  his  own  frequency
                        (IC40 cps) and 100 each at 540 and 1540 cps.  In these tests, however,
                        the intensity of the field was increased  to  15  gauss.  The  results
                        were     same; the S would not avoid the field whe9n paired with shock,
                        but tend@@d to approach under all  conditions.  This  interesting  de-
                        velopment led to the final and most important experinvnt in the pres-
                        ent study, wherein the preference of the S's  for  the  magnetic  field
                        was more fully explored.
                                                         23

                    Table 6. Conditioning with frequencies from 540       1540 cps at  5  gauss.
                              Frequency (cps)          No.  of trials         Results
                                   1540                    100                negative
                                   1440                    100                negative
                                   1340                    100                negative
                    2               1240                    100                negntive
                                   1140                    100                negative
                                   1040  (S''s own         100                negative
                                         frequency)
                                    940                    100                negative
                                    840                                       2negative
                                    740                    100                negative
                                    640                    100                negative
                                    540                    100                negative
                     3.  Approach response to pulsed  fields with frequency   and intensity varied.
                             Up until this point,  the  evidence  was  somewhat  contradictory  and
        2                 .it was not sufficiently clear that the subjects were sensitive and re-
                         sponsi-;e to magnetic fields. Ttierefore, on the  basis  of  the  positive
                         evidence in the last experiment, it was decided to conduct a more
                         comprehensive study of the fish's  @reference  for  or  approach  tendency
                         to the magnetic field.
                             Tliie T maze was us2ed as before, with  the  magnets  positioned  on
                         either side of one arm (Figure  5).  Two  series  of  trials  were.run,
                         one at 10 gauss and the other at 20 gauss.  Each of the four speci-
                         mens of Sternarchus albifrons was put  in  the  maze,  and  the  frequency
                         was adjusted to the subject's own discharce rate, which, in these
                         fish, was 700, 2885, 935, and 1,040 cps respectively.  In subsequent
                         trials the frequency was raised and lowered 100 and 200 cps above
                         and below each subject's normal  discharge  rate  at  26.80C.  Thus,  the
                         experimental design involved  changes  along  two  continua,  frequency
                         and intensity (Table 7).  Under each condition, the fish was placed
                         into t2he maze, and the number of  times  it  entered  the  experimental
                         area in the arm between the magnetic coils during  a  period  of  15  min-
                         utes with the field off a-&id 15 minutes with the field on i;as recorded
                         on a counter. Each fish was tested  for  its  tendency  to  approach  the
                         field at five frequency levels ranging from 200  cps  below  to  200  cps
                 8        above its own frequency and at two intensity levels.  A su=ary of the
                         results are presented in Tables 8 and 9  and  illustrated  in  Figure  9.
                                                         24

                    Table  7.  Experirrental  conditions  for  the  approach-response   experiment
                                          with a :-.ul,;ed magnetic  field.
                                                  10 gauss                    20 gauss
                            S.A.1:1085     15 min on, 15 min off       15 min on, 15 min off
                            S.A.2:900
                +200   c2ps  S.A.3:1240
                            S.A.4:1135
                            S.A.1:985
                            S.A.2:800
                +100   cps  S.A.3:1140
                            S.A.4:103
                            S.A.1:885
                normal      S.A.2:700
                rate        S.A.3:1040
                            S.A.4:935
                            S.A.1:7285
                            S.A.2:600
                -100   cps  S.A.3:940
                            S.A.4:835
                            S.A.1:685
                            S.A.2:500
                -200   cps  S.A.3"840
                            S.A.4:735
                Table   8. Summa--y  of results  for  the  approach  experiment,  showing  the  number
             of times the subjects 2 entered  the  experimental  area  with  the  field  on  and  off.
                               S.A.1          S.A.2              S.A.3             S.A.4
                            10     20       10       20        10       20       10       20
                          gauss  gauss     gauss    gauss    gauss    gauss    gauss    gauss  total
                      on    36     41        69    2   56       92       87       27       81     489
           +200cps    off   44     44        35       49       50       54         6      45     327
                      on    34     44         .49     36       59       74       53       78     427
           +100cps    off   21     17        33       29       42       42       53       52     289
            ,6(srm.   on    38     @8        34       43       27       14       19       23     236
 2          -freg.     off   36     28        26       21       29       17   1   11       16     184
                      on    38     46        44       61       52       50       60       59     410
           -IOOCDS   offl  .25     34        28       32       46       27       39       39     270
                      oni   33     57        52       72       45       49       54   l@57@      419
           .:@c s@l -.,of2 f 144    44        41   1   41       54       36       40   1   39  1  339
                            As we  can see in   the total column, there   was a  very definite
                       tendency for the Ss to enter the area between      the magnets signi  'ficantly
                       more times with the field on than,wlth the field off.  For all fish
                       and under all conditions, the experimental area was entered 1,981 times
              2         with the field on, and 1,409 times with the field off.  Means were cal-
                       culated for the average number of times the fish entered the area with
                       the field on and off under  all  frequencies  and  at  the  10  and  20  gauss

                     levels.  The results are shown in Table 9.  To test the significance
                     of the difference between the combined means, a test was done with the
                     following results:
                                      R=49.53    (field on mean)
                                      7-35.23    (field off mean)
                                      B-14.30    (difference)
                                      EDi=-56-2-
                                      BDi2=14,956
                                      N-40
                                      Di-14.30     2_   E(y,7)2
                                      Sd=10.35                    4288       107.20
                                                         N         40
                                                  S        7.20  10.35
                                             Sd
                      2                Off                 10.35   1.66.
                                           VN- --I         6.25
                                      t            14.30 = 8.61
                      We can thus reject the null hypothesis that the results occurred by
                      chance at the .01 level, i.e.' we can be 99% confident that the ob-
                      served difference was not due to chance.
                Table 9. Mean number of times the Ss entered the experimental area with the
                field on and off at 10 and 20 gauss and overall for al,l frequencies combined.
                                                10 gauss    20 gauss     combined
                            Field on             45.75         53.30       49.53
                            Field   off          35.15         35.30        35.23
                            In   Figure 9, average difference scores were  det2ermined by finding
                        the  difference between the number of times the Ss entered the experi-
                        mental area with the field on and with it off, and dividing this number
                        by 4 (the number of Ss).  This  was  th'en plotted against the various fre-
                        quencies tested.  It can be seen that there are two definite peaks in
                        the approach          of the Ss to the field, at -100cps and in the re-
      2                  gion between +100 to +.200 cps.  Surprisingly, there was a sharp drop
                        at the subjects' own frequency, which is contrary to what we had expected,
                        Previous reports had indicated that these fish are most sensitive at
                        their own discharge frequency.
                            After this analysis of the data, it was apparent that the fish
                        were not responding to a pulsed magnetic 7field in the expected manner,
                        i.e,, responses at the frequency of the fish at maze temperature were
                        not the maximal responses observed, nor were the frequencies at which
                        maximal responses were seen related in a periodic manner to the base
                        (26.80C) frequency of the fish.
                                                        26

              20--
                                                                               2.o
        0 0                                                        ........
                                                                  4
          fa
        41 4
                                                                               J-
                                                       0
            2                                                         f efec'tri'c@l dischargel--,.-.-.
      Frequency of:ma'Snetic. f iolcis in-i6l'at3'.on to,fish-s frequency;o
             Figure 9.  Changes in average difference scores with magnetic field frequency.
                         Therefore, an additional series of trials were run  extending  the
                    frequency 2range of the magnets.  A field strength of 20 gauss was used
                    throughout to maximize responses.
                         The procedure'was-the same as before. The  experimental  fish  was
                    'Placed in the maze, the lights were extinguished, and two minutes  al-
                    lowed to elapse before counting began. The number of  times  in  a  15-
                    minute period that the fish entered between the magnetic coils with
         8           the magnets off was then recorded. With the  electrical  input  to  the
                    magnet ard to the switch adjusted to produce 20 gauss  and  the  desire'd
                    frequency with the standardized pulse as shown -1@n Figure 5 for the mag-
                    net longitudinal axis, the entries into the area  between  the  magnets
                                                    27

                          GNETIC                                                                                   ONTAL
                                                                                          tiAGNET FREQIIENCY  IIORIZ
    LD.
                                                                                         SCALE, 100 Hz. DIVISIONS. BASE
                         SA I                                                            FISII FREQUENCY IN CENTER2
    ed on performance
    a 20 Gauss field.
                                        385                                                1385
                         SA 2
                                                                   00                                    1500
         co
                         -SA 3
                                                                  LU4U                 1440
                          SA 4
3
                                            85                      935

                        0
                            in 15 minutes with the magnets  on  and  off  were  counted.  After  each
                            series of half hour trials, the fish  was  returned  to  his  home  tank,
                            the n.,agnets readjusted if necessary to  accommodate  the  frequency  of
                            the rext subject, and the  process  started  aoain.  In  any  given  day,
                            one 2fish would have a maximum  of  two  half-hour  trials,  separated  by
                            at least one hour.
                                The results  are  shown  in  Figure  10.  Tnese  per-formance  curves
                            were drawn by subtracting the  number  of  entries  durina  each  control
                            run from the nurber  of  entries  during  the  companion  experimental  run
                            at each ma-net  frequency.level.  In  actual  numbers,  the  entries  under
                            cont-rol conditions ranged from 16 to  90  and  under  experimental  condit
                            tions ran-ed from 14 to 87 in a 15-minute period.
                                Limitations in the equipment prevented the testing of performance
                            at frequency levels of half and  double  that  of  the  base  frequency  of
                            ea@-,h fish. However, the range tested  was  adequate  to  show  that  sen-
                            sitivity to a magnetic field  in  Sternarclius  albifrons  is  vastly  dif-
                            ferent from that to an electric current.
                                All of the  data  in  previous  reports  with  regard  to  response  to
                            magnets have been discussed in  terms  of  the  current  generated  in  the
                            fish by the magnetic fi2eld.  This  may  be  t-.ue,  but  these  performance
                            curves clearly  indicate  that  the  sensitivity  to  magnetism  is  more
                            complex. The  literature  is  in  agreement  that  maximum  sensitivity  to
                            applied current occurs  at  the  fish's  own  frequency  (Granath,  1967,
                            Figure  11).  The  results  reported  here  indicate  that  maximum  sensi-
                       2     tivity to a magnetic field occurs  at  a  point  or  points  one  to  three
                            hundred Hertz above  and/or  below  the  base  frequency.  What  is  most
                            certainly indicated is that raxiiru,.n A.2 s@itivi@ty does not  occur  at
                            the fish's own fre         with the ma2netic field.
                                        so
                    2                   7.
                                       2
                                       Z30 -
                                                                                 20
                                       ;:Io
                                                    2            3            4
                                                               I 0
                                                       Fngou[Ncy (HZ)
2                         Figure 11. Response spectrum to a uniform AC field.  (After Cranath, 1967).
                                  If, as our data indicate, the fish respond to more than induced
                             current in a pulsing  magnetic  field,  there  is  still  the  problem  of
                             defining more  clearly  the  stimuli  to  which  they  are  responding.  A
                             crude model of a fish @as achieved by moving an inducti6on coil through
                             the  maze.  Results'are  reproduced  in  part  in  Figure  5.  These  wave
                                                               29

                       forms were induced with the axis of the  test  coil  parallel  to  the  axis
                       of the riagnetic coils. With the  a-is  of  the  induction  coil  perpendic-
                       ular to the axis  of  the  magnetic  coils,results  were  similar  from  the
                       distal end of the test arm to the  point  15  cm  from  the  magnet  center,
                       but induced currents were weaker, 2 - 50 mV as op2posed to  the  5  -  80  mV
                       sho%4n on the diagram. However, from 15 cm, on  toward  the  magnet  center,
                       the induced pulses became more roundcdand diminished in strength to
                       about I gauss at the  center  of  the  magnetic  coil.  A  behavior  pattern
                       observed in the fish  indicated  that  the  first  model,  though  extremely
                       crude, was better than2 the second. The  fish,  in  moving  from  the  distal
                       end of the test arm would hesitate at about  ttis  15  -  18  cm  area,  and
                       then frequently continue to the magnet  center  in  a  rush,  working  their
                       jaws and moving in  an  exciied  manner.  Interestingly,  the  induced  cur-
                       rent pulse in the-test coil assumes a  wave  form  that  is  very  like  the
                       fish's own di2scharge at this 15  -  18  cm  point  in  our  test  apparatus,
                            One other  aspect  of  observed  behavior  toward  the  magnetic  field
                       is unexplained. When the fish chose the leg  of  the  T  at  a  point  0  to
                       10 cm from the  intersection,  they  %iere  observed  to  sometimes  execute
                       a forward roll, frequently two or  three  in  succession  with  some2  degree
                       of force. As can be seen from the  diaaram,  there  appears  to  be  no  in-
                       dividuality in this area of the  field.  This  response  was  seen  to  some
                       degree at all frequencies and-at 10 and 20 ga-ass, but  seemed  to  be  most
                       common at those frequencies of maximum  response  to  the  magnet.  A  crude
                       three-dimensional plot of the field shows2  it  is  cigar  shaped.  The  fish
                       were restricted to an area + 5 cm above  and  below  the  edge  of  the  ci-
                       gar-shaped field (23 cm in 'jiatreter). At  this  10  cm  point,  the  lines
                       oi equal force would be  essentially  parallel  to  the  long  axis  of  the
                       arm in the vertical plane, and cur-,.,ing  toward  the  magnet  center  line
                       in2 the horizontal plane.  Perhaps it is this gradient to which the
                       fish respond in this manner.
                 F. Summary of results.
                          (a) The rate of discharge in the electric  field  of  Ster-narchus  albi-
                     frons is a  positive  function  of  temperature.  In  three  subjects  (S.A.1,
                     3, and 4) the change was +  50  cps  for  1  degree  C.  The  other  specimen,
               2      (S.A.2) varied + 15 cps per 1 degree C.
                          (b) The fish showed no significant approach  or  avoidance  behavior  to-
                    -ward a static (non-pulsed) magnetic field of  9  -  10  gauss  in  a  Y  maze.
                          (e) A conditioning procedure  in  which  elec'tric shock was paired
                     with a static magnetic field of 9 - 10 gauss and 3k  gauss  in  a  Y  maze  in
      0               order to establish an avoidance response was not successful.
                           (d) In a study of the effects  of  drugs,  Nerbut,il  and  levodopa  (L.
                     dopa) failed to alter the discharge  patterns  of  the  subjects'  field,  al-
                     though L-dopa produced  a  more  variable  temperature-frequency  relationship
                                                        30

                     'and some abnormal behavior. Pontocaine,  however,  modified  the  discharge
                      frequency by depressing the rate sever6ly.
                           (e) Conditioning trials were attempted with a  60-cycle  AC  magnetic
                      field of I - 42 gauss paired with electric shock in a  T  maze.  The  fish
                      learned @.o avoid the field at intensities of 34, 26, and 218  gauss,  but
                      the results were inconsistent at 9 and 1 gauss.
                           (f) Additional conditioning trials were run in the T  maze  with  a
                      pulsed, unidirectional field at frequencies ranging from  540  to  1540
                      cps at 5 and 15 gauss in which the field was paired with shock, but
                      the subject failed to learn to avoid the field.  Instead, the  fish  showed
               2       a tendency to stay in the field regardless of the  shock  it  received.
                           (g) Each subject was tested for an approach tendency  to  the  field
                      in a preference study. The pulsed field was  varied  in  intensity  from
                      10 to 20 gauss, and in frequency from 200 cps above the  fish's  own  fre-
                     .quency to 200 cps below it by decrements of 100 cps.  The subjects
                      2showed a significant preference at the .01 level for  the  area  between
                      the magnetic coils with the field on as compared with  trials  with  the
                      field off, indicating clearly that they are sensitive  to  the  magnetic
                      stimuli. The preference study showed  maximal  responses  at  frequency
                      rates other than those of the fish, in a pattern  totally  dissimilar  to
                      imposed current stimuli.
2
              IV. REFERENCE BIBLIOGRAPHY,
                   AS alides, E. Information  processing  by  electric  fishes.  General  Dynamics,
                      Pomona Division.
                   Anonymous.  Ariadne.  Nei; Scient., July 31, 1969, 253.
                   Anonymous.  Electricity and disease.  New Scient., July 24, 1969, 173.
                   Anonymous.  L-dopa ready for FDA approval. @ted. World News,  July  18,  1969i
                      35-37.
                   Anonymous.  Radio waves and health.  Nei4 Scient., Nov.6, 1969, 276.
                   Anonymous.  The unshakable man who doped out L-dopa.  lied, World l@leiis,
                      Nov.14, 1969, 24-25.
                   Barham, E.G,, W.B. Huckabay, R. Dowdy and  B.  Burns.  Microvolt  electric
       2               signals from fishes and the environment.  Science,  1969,  164,  965-968.
                   Barnes, E.B. Biomagnetic mechanisms. Diss.  Lb-stv.,  1968,  29,  1557-1558.
                   Bauer, R.  Analysis of the electric discharges and the prey capture behavior
                      in the electric catfish,  M@@     @ electricus  Grielin  1789  (Siluroidea,
                      Ifalapteruridae2, Lacep, 1803). 4. Ylrgl. Lhvsicl.,  1968,  59,  371-402.
                   Beischer, D.E.  Biomagneti,cs..  In: Lectures in Acros  1,t
                                                                        -p. I d., Feb. 4-8, 1963,
                      365-386.
                   Beischer, D.E. Research on the effects of very  strong  magnetic  fields  and
                      of magm2etic field-free environments on man  and  animals.  Progress  report
                      for Nov.1, 19 8 - Jan.31, 1969.  NASA  order.R-39,  NASA-CR-99767,  documnt
                      series N69-18293, NASA.
                   Beisc'her, D.E., E.F. Miller and J.C. Knepton. Exposure of man  to  low  in-
                      tensity magnetic fields in a coil system.  NASA  order  R-39,  NASA-CR-
                7      90223, NAMI-1018.
                                                        31

                   Bennett, M.V.L.  Mechanisms of alectroreception.  In: Lateral Line Detectors.
                      Proccedines of a Svmoosiuni. April 16-18, 1966, k:ew York.  Bloomington, Ind.
                      Indiana Uiv. Press, 1967, 313-393.
                   Bennett, II.V.L.  Iloural control of electric organs.  In:  The Central Nervous
                      System and Fish Behavior, ed. by2 D. Ingle. Chicago, Ur@iv-. Zh-icago Press,
                      1968, 147-169.
                   Billard, R.  Im..obilization of aquarium fishes by a magnetic field.  Ann. Biol.
                      Anin. Biochim. 2i2phvs., 1966, 6, 533-536.
                   Bennett, II.V.L. and H. Crundfest.  Analysis of depolarizing and hyperpolarizing
                      inactivation response2s in gy"otid electroplaques.  J. Gen.             1966,
                      50, 141-169.
                   Brown, M.V. and C.W. Coates.  Further comparison of length and voltage in
                      the electric eel, Blectrophorous electricus.  ZooloRica. 1952. 37, 191-197.
                   Bullock, T.F. and S. Chichibu.  Further analysis of sensory coding in electro-
                      receptors of electric fish.  2Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 1965, 54, 422-429.
                   Busby, D.E.  Biomagnetics'Report prep7ar-ed for NASA under contract no. MSr-115
                      (NASA CR-889) by Lovelace Foundation for @ledica'l Education and Research,
                      September 1967.
                   Chagas, C., A. Leao, M.F. @foreira and M.S. Santos.  Low voltage discharge of
                      the electric eel.  Nature, 19462, 158, 746-747.
                   Caldwell, W.E.  E. Gaddis and M. Werber.  An operant electromagnetic chamber.
                      J. Genet. P;Ychol., 1969, 115, 7-16.
                   Caldw@ll-, li.E. and J.E. Germas. An'exploratory study of  the  environmental
                      preferences of electric fish (Sternarchus albifrons,). In press
                   Caldwell,-W.E. 2and F. Russo. An exploratory study of the  effects  of  an  AC
                      magriatic field upon the behavior of the Italian honeybee (,Lois m.-ellifica).
                      J. Genet. Psychol. 1968, 113, 233-252.
                   Coates, C-.W., M. Altamirano and it. Grundfest. Activity in  electric  organs
                      of knife fishes.  Science, 1954, 120, 845-846.
                   Danyulite, G.P. and d.A.-@Fa-l@nkina.  Investigation of the physiological mech-
                      anism of action of a direct-current electrical field on fish.  In: Beiavior
                      and Receotion in Fish, Moscow, 1967, 56-62. (Translated  from  Russian  and
                      available from the Clearinghouse for Federal Scientific and Technical In-
                      formatio--t, PB 184921)
                   Dewsbury, D.A.  Diurnal 2iluctuations in the discharge frequency of a gymnotid
                      electric fish.  Psychon. Sai., 1966a, 6, 35-36.
                   Dewsbury, D.A.  Some corre@lates of electric organ discharge frequency in three
                      species of electric fishes.  Diss. Abstr.. 1966b, 26(11), 6866-6867.
                   Dewsbury, D.A.  Stimulus-produced changes in the 4@ischarge rate of an electric
            2          fish and their relation to arousal. Ely.Shol. Rec.,  1966c,  16,  495-504.
                   tnger, P.S. and T. Szabo. Effect of temperature on  the  dtscharge  rates  of
                      the electric organ of some gymnotids.  Como. Biochem. Phvsiol., 1968, 27,
                      625-627.
                   Erskine, F.T., D.H. Howe-and B.C. Weed.  The 'discharge period of  the  weakly
         2             electric fish Sternarctius albifrons.  Amer.Zool., 1966, 6, 521.
                   Howe, D.W., F.T. Erskine and L.P. Granatt@-.-Th'resliold sensitivity of Sternarch-
                      us albifrons to electric fields.  Amer. Zool., 1966, 6, 521.
                   'Callon, R.L.,,F.J. Mandriota and R.L. Thompson. Effects  of  temperature  and
                      shock 2on electric organ discharge rate in  Gnathonemus.  Proc.  75th  Ann.
                      Con. Amr. lay.Ehol. As@.oc., 1967, 2, 131-132.
                   Got7tl-ieb,- N-.D. and W.E. Caldwell.  Magnetic field effects on the compass
                      c*chanism and activity level of the snail Helisoma durvi endiscus.  J.
                      Genet. Psvchol.,0 1967, 111, 85-102.
                   Granath, C.?., H.G. Sachs and F.T. Erskine  III.  Electrical  sensitivity  of
                      a weakly electric fish.  Life Sci., 6, 2373-2377.

                  Gruitdfast, 11. Electric fishes.  Sci. Arner., 1960, 203, 115-124.
                  Ilarder, W. and 11. Milemann.  On the frequency behavior of Gvrinarchus niloticus.
                     Z. Vcrgl. Physiol., 1967, 54, 85-88.
                  Hixson, J.R.  L-dopa.  Fam. licalth, January 1970, 44-47,
    2              Keynes, R.D. The thermodynamics of nerve and  electric  organ  (crab,  squid,
                     frog, rabbit, electric fish). In: rroc. Conf. Islerve Tissue,  Phila.  Pa.,
                                                         @nd-R - , 1966, 293-304.
                     Nov.12-13, 1964.  New York: liarper      owe
                  Krivoy, W.A., R.A. Hutgins, D.C. Kroeger, B.E. Ilobe2rly and J.R. Porter.
                     A technique for measuring the actions of drugs by using  electric  f-ish.
                     Med. Res. Eno               -20.
                                 ,., 1967, 6, 16
                  Lanmrs, A.J.J.C. and J.M. Van Rossum. Bizarre  social  behaviour  in  rats  in-
                     duced by a combination of a peripheral decarbox@lase  inhibitor  and  dopa.
                 2    Eur. J. Pharmncol.l. 1968, 5, 103-106.
                  Larilr.er, J.L. and J.A. MacDonald. @'ensory feedback from electroreceptors  to
                     electrorriotor pacemaker centers in gym-iotides. Amer. J. Physiol.,  1968,
                     214, 1253-1261.
                  Lemkan, F.V. More on Cerletti and electric  fish.  Amer.  J.  Psvchiat.,  1969,
     2                125, 16001-1610.
                  Lissmann, H.W. Continuous electrical signals from the tail of  a  fish,  G  m-
                                                                                             .Y
                     narchus niloticus.  Natura, 1951, 167, 201-202.
                  Lissmann, H.W. On the function and evolution of  electric  organs  in  fish.
                     J. ExD. Biol.92 1958a, 35, 156-191.
                  Lis'@mann, H.W.  Ecological studies on the Gymnotidae.  In: Bioelectrojenesis,
                     ed. by C. Chagas.  Amsterdam, Elsevier, 1961, 215-223.
                  Lissmann, H.W. Electric location by  fishes.  Sci.  Amer.,.1963,  208,  50-59.
                  Lissmann, H.W. and K.E. Machin. The mechanisn@o-f object location  in  Gvrl-
   2                  narchus niloticus and similar fish. J. Exp.  Biol.,  1958,  35,  451-485.
                  Lissmann, H.W.-and A.M. Mullinger. Organization  of  ampullary  electric  re-
                     ceptors in Gy=otidae (Pisces). Proc. RoX. Soc.  Ser.  B  Biol.  Sci.,  1968,
                     169, 345-378.
                  Lissmann, H.W. and H.O. Schwassmann. Activity rhythm  of  an  ele2ctric  fish,
                     Gymnarhanphicthvs hypostomus, Ellis,  Z. YILPI. Phvsiol., 1965, 51,
                     153-171.
                  Machin, K.E. and H.W. Lissmann.  The mode of operation of the electric receptors
                     in 2ZEnerchus niloticus.  J. Exi>. Biol.1 1960, 37, 801-808.
                  Murray, R.W. The function,octhe ampullae  of  Lorenzini  of  elasmobranchs  (Tor-
                     peda, Scyliorhinus, rays, sharks, Raja, Squalus,  mormyrids,  Hypopomua,  S
                     Sternarchus, Sigerurannia, Gymnarchus, Negoprion).  In:  Lateral  Line  Detec-
                     tors. Proc. Svmp. A@pril 16-18, 1966, Now  York.  Bloomington,  Ind.,  Indiana
                     @-ni-v.   s2, 1967, 277-293.
                  14andriota, .-.J., R.L. Thompson and M.V.L. Bennett.  Classical  conditioning
                     of electric organ discharge rate in Ilor-,nyrids.  Science, 1965, 150 (3704),
                     1740-1742.
                  Mandriota, F.J., R.L. Thompson and M.V.L.  Bennett.  'Avoidance  conditioning
                     of the rate of electric orga2n discharge in I-lorr-yrid fish. Anim.  Behav..
                     1968, 16, 448-455.
                  Michaelson, S.@t., R.A.E. Thomson and W.J. Quinlan.  Effects  of  electromagnetic
                     radiatrons on physiologic responses. Aerosz,. lied., 1967,  38,  293-298.
                  Moos, W.S., R.K. Clar, and F. Krown.  A  precision  controlled  environmental
          2           chamber for studies of the effects of electric fields on biological objects.
                     Int. J. Biometior., 1965, 9, 117-126.
                  Niussen, H. and I.J.H. Isbrucker. Gvmnotus carado  and  G.  anguillaris  (syn.
                     q. coro2inae), tiio ofteniconfused species of gymnotij  species  (Pisces,
                     Cypriniformes).  Beaufortia, 1968, 15,6 161-168.

                    Radil-Ileissi T. and 14. I'lovacc%,ic. Biophysical  parameters  of  the  skin  of
                       the skin of the electric  fish  Tornedo  r,,ormorata.  Mar.  Biol.,  1969,  3,
                       304-305.
                    Sandler, It., F. Karotim  and  C.R.J.  Ruthven.  rn-Ilydroxyphenylacatic  acid  forma-
                       t2ion  from  L-dopa  in  man:  suppression  by  neomycin.  Science,  1969,   166,
                       1417-1418.
                    Schiian,  H.P.  and  L.  Sher.  Alternating-currcnt  field-induced  forces  and  their
                       biological implications.  J. Electrocha@n. Soc., 1969, 116, 170-174.
                    Seiden,  L.S.  and  A.  Carlsson.  Temporary  and  partial,  antagonism  by  L-dopa
                       of  reserpine  induced  suppression  of  a  conditioied  avoidance   response.
                       Ps,vchopharm          ) 1963P 41 418-423,
                    Seiden,  L.5.  and  A.  Carlsson.  Brain  and  heart  cat&chalamine  levels   after
                       L-dopa administration in reserpine treated mice: correlations with a con-
                       ditioned avoidance response.  Psvchooharmacolozia, 21964, 5, i78-1.81.
                    Suga, N.  Coding  in  tuberous  and  ampullary  organs  of  a  gyrmotid  electric
                       fish.  .1. Como. i'Teurol., 1967a, 131, 437-451.
                    Suga,  N.  Electrosensitivity  of  canal  and  free  noaromast  organs  in  a  gy=otid
                       electric fish.  J. Cow.P. Nleurol., 1967b, 131, 453-457.
            2        Suga, N.  Electrosens@ti-vity of specialized and ordinary lateral line organs
                       of  the  electric  fish,  Gymnotus  carapo.  In:  Lateral  Line  Detectors.   Proc.
                       Svmo. April 16018, 1966, New York.  Bloomin@Son,-Ind,, Indiana Univ. Press,
                       1967cp 395-409.
                    Szabo, T.  Sense orkans of the lateral line system in some 2electric fish of
                       the Gvmr..otidae. Vior.-Yvridae and Gvmnarchidae.  J. 112  h., 1965, 117, 229-250.
                    Szabo, T.  Activity of peripheral     and central neurons involved in electrove-
                       ception. Gnathonerus         va@nus@, Gnathonemus octersi, Eigenm.2nnia virescens.
                       Steatoi,enys eletans,   2   @7,jtis carano, Ster.nar.c'.Ius albifrons). In:  Late
                       Line Detectors. Proc. Svmp. April 16-13, 1966, New York. Bloomington, Ind.,
                       Indiana Univ. Press,   1967, 205-311.
                    Szabo,  T.,  P.$.  En-er  and  T.H.  Bullock.  Functional  characteristics  of  the
                       electroreceptors of the  electric  fish  of  the  genus  Steatogenys  of  l2ow  fre-
                       quency.  1. 11NsLol., Suppl.1, 1968, 315-316.
                    Szabo, T.  and  S.  Ilagiwara.  A  latency-change  mechanism  involved  in  sensory
                       coding  of  electric  fish  (mormyrids).  Phvsiol.  Behav.,  1967,  2,  331-335.
                    Wachtel, A.W. and R.B. Szamier,  Special cutaneous receptor organs of fish;
                   2    the tube-rous organs of Eigenwannia.  J. @fort)hol.,  1966, 119, 51-80.
                    Watanabe, A. and  K.  Takeda.  The  change  of  dischar,e  frequency  by  AC  stimulus
                       in a @eak electric fish.  J. Lx                     40, 57-66.
                                                         _2. @iol., 1963,
                    Webb,  G,D.  Electrophysiologi7cal  studies  of  the  isolated   posterior   moiety
                       of the electroplax of the electric eel.  J. Cell. Phvsiol,, 1977, 70, 197-20$.
                    Wright,  P.C.  An  electrical  receptor  in  fishes.  Nature,  1958,  131,   64-65.
                V. WHERE - 7ABO'ttATORY INDEX.
                         The  following  is  a  list  of  laboratories,uuniversities0,  and   institutes
                    where work is in progress.
                    University of California
                    Graduate School
                    San Diego-LaJolla, California 92038
                    (Prinipal investigator: Th. Bullock)
                                                            34

                  Thp- City College of New York
                  The City College Research Foundation
                  Ne,w York, L%led York 10031
                  (Principal investigator: Frank J. Mandriota)
                  Columbia University
                  College of Physicians and Surgeons
                  New-York, New York 10027
                  (Principal investigators: Arthur Karlin; David Nachmansohn)
                  University of  Connec2ticut
                  Biological Sciences  Group
                  Storrs, Connecticut  06368
                  (Principal inves,tigator:.Tobias L. Schwartz)
                  University of  Connecticut
                  Graduate School
                  Storrs, Connecticut  06268
                  (Principal investigator: A.W. Wachtel)
                  University of Ilaryland
                  School of Yedicine
                  Baltimore, Ilaryland
               8   (Principal investigator:L. Holdman)
                  Pennsylvania Hospital
                  Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
                  (Principal -'-nvestigator: Su=er I. Zacks)
                                                      35

