                                                                                              -Amid                                            
.........
                                                                                            DATA                CTION
                                               USE OF LINC-8 FOR EEG                                   REDU
                                                                                  i/6-7/67

                            USE OF LINC-8 FOP, EF-G DATA RZDUCTION
                  Baci<;
                       @round
                         Interpretation of EEG Waveforms for information relating
                  to subject state has been an area of long@ interest to people outside
                   L'    curophysiological-field. A dozen years ago., Norbert
                  o the  r
                  W-.ener cc@r@3ucte-d i-avestigations of brain records. He sought to
                  apply to E-EG interpretation, some of the statistical communica.
                  tio-,i theory developed by his circle at MIT. This tleory has been
                                          I
                  set forth by Y. W. -Iee.  In 1954 Dr. Weiner was particularly
                  interesteel in "a nominal 10 cps clock pulse" which he hypothe-
      2            sized. formed the basic timing for serial rd-order-:ng of the brain
                  processing organization, he noted state differences associated with
                  this part of the spectrum in different subjects.
                         Deta
                             ilgd specific,_statis.t-ical reduction techn-ques are laid
                  out by
                  by Dr.                              2                         he
                  former-attacks reduction in a classical statistical appro
                  dealing wit@-i power spectral estimates, phase functions, auto-
                  covariance and @cross covariance functions, transfer functions,
                  ccrerenc%r, etc, He uses these descri,)tors to determine signifi-
                  cant factor!; associated with EEG responses. A large number of
 2                 variables can be treated sirnultaneouily.
                         The latte'r attacks the problem principally from a "period
                  analysis" standppint. The basic waveform is clipped and zero-
                  ciossover inter@Vals are scr,,,tinized. Similarly, the first and
                  second der'Lvatives are processed for clipped periods. The inves-
                  tigator utilizes all three of these on t2he same time base to ex=ine
                  the sp4ictrum for state evaluation.
                         The references also give summaries of other recent tech-
                  niques applied to EEG analysis.
                         It is intended here to preseat the results of a modest study
                  car7ie,i out on @k set of data furnished through the corrtesy of Drs.
                                    or educationa8l purposes. The subject was

                           recorded, in three  states,  on  1/411,  2  track,  FM  tape  run  at
                           7 1/2"Isec as follows:
                                    (al) Drowsy        S m in.         (a-2)  I kcps tone
                                    (bl) Alpha         S min.          (b-2)       13
                                    (c 1) Light sleep and Alpha        (C-22)
                           Editing  and Reduction
                                    The tape was played, into the A/D che-anels of the LINC - 8
                           for  editinv, using the SCOPE-8 program.  The three 5 minu'te
                           samples were examined for gross character-.stics.  Comments
                           were as ;ollows:
                                           (a) Drowsy  30-60 secon2d arnplitude (long term)
                                    modulation was noted to be present in addition to the
                                    7-10 cps dominant component band.
                                           (b) Aloha: more extreme excursion; less pro-
                                    nounced long term modulation; pronounced short term
                                    modulation or beating.
                                           (c)  Lig2ht   Sleep:   less   pronounced   excursions.
                                    The data was visually edited again and a run made to store
                           the data.  This is given in the colmniilabeued Run I of Table 1.
                           It was -at-tempted to recover representative samples of high, into-r-
                           mediate and low signal power.  Block storage numbers are shown.
                           2         Next tl-.; stored data was examined for spectral content using
                           the proaram FROANA; scope camera pictures -wire taken for com-
                                    0
                           parison in matrix form for significant differences in the v-arious
                           states.
                                    Reloeats of data taking was next performed in Runs TI and
                         2  Ill. R-.ln III was sampled at a  lower  rate;  this  gives  a  longer
                           sample interval.
                                    Next, selected blocks were differentiated once and stored
                           in ILzations corresponding to start point 100       000      waveform
                           s ample, I 0 0 ii r s t de r ivative, e tc.

                                                                -3
                                It w@(S feasible to make certain preliminary evaluations
                        of the data at  this  point.  These  were,
                                        1'.  Signal content for discrirnina-tion between states
                                was highest for the high points of the long term mbdulation.
                             2                              ncy resolution was (I/Z cps) more
                                        1. A f ine r f reque
                                 relevant than tl'--- I cps resOlution-
                                                           c made for oscillosc-ope  pictures
                                 Finally a set of  runs  wer
                         to sbo.,v the below format:
        2                                 1.   sampled    waveforra
                                         2.   frequency   analysis of (1)
                                                           ve   of (1)
                                         3.  first  derivati
                                         4.  frequency analysis of
                                    ,d Conclusions
                                  Figures 1, 21 and 3 show thr2ee reprerentative outputs
                          whicl,. appeared tentatively as lity-pical":
                                          1.  ELr@ this is sample 060, 160 of the data,
                                  taken at a t@igh point.  The waveforrn is shown at the top;
                                                                       shown out to
                                  its spectrum is 2immediately below
                                  32 cps.  A dominant spil-,e shows up at. 9 cps; a plateau
                                  frorn 8-13 cps is present.  A "characteristir-11 bump
                                   rhomed up in the, region 14-20 cps.
                                              AlPba: this is sample 062. 162; a red-action of
                                   the hump at 14-20 cps was noted.  k bifarcation or
                                   "forking" appeared in the alpha region at the depression
                                   zt 9 cps.  This would explain the bea--ing or short terrn
                                   rnodulatiol.
                                                                        this is sample 072, 172;
                                           3.
                                                DI           2                       a general
                                   predominance of the alpha tones is noted with
                                    shift in energy to the lower end of the spectrum.
                                                                                            'hows
                                    For all three sample$ the first derivative spectrum s
                            -up as expected; namely, the "bluing" of the spectr4um by applying
                            a derivative function.
                                    It would appear that a. parametric stud-I of BW, frequency,
                             accenting functions (S. S2  etc*    examination of phase relation-

                                                          -4-
                                                      nd ot
                       ships, reducflon techniqueso a     her processing would be
                       meaningiul,  "his rnight permit the design of j. real time EEG
                       analyzer which would not require a high level of training for
                       operation.

                                             REFERENCES
                        MIT Report i 181, Y. W. Lee
                     2.
                    3.

                                           Li
                                                             qt
                                           th
                                                                                        CO
                                                     co               ti       A. C,P
                                                                                    Al
                               5                        4.P
                                                                                    ea
                                                                                    fA
                                           ke
                                                                                                  40%
                                                                         Romeo

              t
                                                                                                                    ce       40

                                                                                                 AGh

