                  CUO&O.  Z;ocurit.,f                                                21  February    19-19
                  Securiti Rosoarch Section
                  Interrogation Tachniques.of Unfriendly Countrio3
                  DurirZ t@w   v.,;,,;;k of Jfinuary 1G - 22, llil0s, a British    Ra.2-non Cs-.t'nolic
              r&-okly callad t.w 'Tablat', publis-.Od an article Ja v.-'.,ilch thi.,y. clrti:red
              t-imt the :,un,-                                             ronno    a     vill-dustroylric
                           ,,nria:i Coiivnuiiiate pliumiod to use nacted
              u(;, on Cardinal Mindszonty at tl-.o time or h:Ls trial an           cliarres of hi-li
              dr                                                                                   0
              treason.  The  article  in  the  "Tablet"  said  that  it  is  coranon  'ft-novrledr-e  that
              political prisoners-of Soviet2-occupiod countries are given the drug artor
              being  starved  and  deprived   of   water.   At   first,   it   produces   solf-c-onfidonce,
              then oL reaction which includes a strour, headechv and vertiro,,                     t3
                                                                                         accordin-      to
              the article.  T.2io latter orrecto tu-e described Rs a sense of uncertainty,
              a blind urge to obey tho ali@@htost orders and inability to ai&y no to agithinr,,,
                  In this' country, it was 'later discovered tlirat "actedron" is Pt trndo
              al-io for tl.w' drug we know as bonzedrine (or amphetamine sulfate)2.
                  klt.-wugh  no  trace   or   the   use   of   bentodrine   for   Interrogation   purposes
              in  the United States can be found, It has boon the contention of this orfice
              for some  time  that  the  drug   has   strong   possibilities   for   the   extraction   of
              inrormation   during   an   lnterroration.   The   drur,,   benzodrine,   oidm.2Inistored   in
              sufflciantly  larre  dosoo,  sets  w  a  at,-ong  3tiT-IU1=t  eind  makes   the   ate.)-ioat
              ovor-confidunt. wundisoriminatin,-, nnd so.-.iewhnt  1FLckinC,  in  iti',til)itiona  (@p'ro-
              vided ILI!,E sub.'ect is     2      no ph.,/3ical outlet foi- his n-ii-ily acq@.-ired onercy
              other  ILhrji  conversation).  It  is  durine-  Lhis  period  tlint  It  is  folt   that   a
              great deal of inrormation could be oli         cited   which   ordinarily   would   not   be
              obtainable*
                   It is  further felt     that there is2 also nnothor c4@-rong lnterrocation possi-
              bili4,.y  in  ttie  use'  of  Lonzedrine  beside   the   "benzodrine   acceleration'   poriod
              mentioned  above.  Follo-ain:;  ttm  termination   of   tio   3tim-alation   effect   of   a
              loroo doso   of  t)cnzodrine  or  o  series  of  small  2dosea,  tliex-e  Is  a   period   of
              p.Vsical exhaustion FLid montal deprezalon.  TIiis 4-a coured by ti-to wlditionrl
              demand placed on the body by tlw druc and by -L,io absence of sufficient fuel,
              in  the  fom  of  food,  to  support  the  body  at  tlio  @iicli  perk2  of  activity   which
                                                                       ,ce oA" tho drug
              is alwoys present when one is unaut- the lnfluer                           .     (benzedr'ne
              conplotoly aulli.Lliss -the person's appetite ;7iiilo u.-i,.iur its infl-..au.,ice).  During
              this state of depression, It 2is f-@@lt that the sub-'ect. in his despair, would
              bronk. dorm and Cive out  tiiuch  infoination  w'.Iiich  vould  otiierviso  t)o  vjith!ialcl.
                   The sibo-7a montioiiod possiblo uses or        the drag explain a L;o-)d portion or
              t@te -nateriel in the "Tablet's" imrticle.  The lelter ef'focts. described by ttio
              "Tablet' an a bl.Lid urze to obey the sliclitest orders and inhbllity to any no
              to aLVthinG, cannot be expltv.inod by w or the physical or mental orfects or
              either the 'benzodrine acceleration' period or the following 'mental depression
           9   period.  For this reason, other techniques must be used In conjunction with the
              administerin& of benzedrine.-to produce.the other mentioned conditions.

        Chief iSecurity   Branch                   12-                    24 FebruoLry     1949
            Alt'riou-h it la fel-L   Lhnt t!ioae  liki-,tor  arrects  could  tiot  be  produced
        b.y bentedrins, it ties been 4.lie 3pin-Lon of this Office thoit. the "bo.-izedrine
        depi-ession" piiase- of the drug could be2 utilized very readily to produce            a
        state of 'suboonoious isolation' or "hypnotic state".in whlch there would
        be a blind ur6o to obey    tiie sllehtest orders and an inability to say no           to
        a.-qthiziG,, as mentioned in t-to article,,
             In tllo case of Coirtliiisl Windszonty's triol,      co rtpi iii 2otliissions of ruilt
        were conblate-rtly modo over ox period of doys which --ould         ln(liceo   that   a
        coiiditioii  existed  during  -nhich  the  Cerdinal  wan  continuqlly   un,ler   the   influence
        of sor.9 unknown force,  and  iwt  for  -.*rely  a-period  of  a  fevr.  hours  as  would  be
        the  case  vvith  2the  utilization  of  the   "benzedrine   depression'   phrae,,   The   pro-
        duction  of  this  "bentedrine   depression"   phase-could   be   caused   to   recur   periodi-
                   the subject would first have to, I)e riven new
        cally bu.                                                        doses of benzedrine
        which  would  produce  acceleration  before  t'.Ie   desir2ed   depres:)ion.   IX   thin   were
        the case,  t,w  Co-rdinmlls  testl-aony  -,vould  be  ver.,   inconsistent:beewaso   of the
        Opposite n.,3ntal state %7t&ic'i would be present durini-
                                                                      the   two   different   psycho-
        lo-,@cal l@.i2wos*  ror this   renson,  it  is  felt   that   some   additional   technique
        vias usod on  Cotrdirkel  '-'indezenty  In  conjunction  vrith,  or  independent  of,  the
        ad-uinisterinr, of tiie drur,, benzedrine,
             Every  lndieFAtion,  from  'what  information  can  be  obtained,   poirts   to   the
        ract that  the  Cardinal  was  laborinr,  under  a  prolonged  iarluence   or   tlw   type
        which can be prodaced only by tocluiities similar to, or ti-xo same as, the voirioun
        methods of subdonclaus isolation known to this office.  This beinr- tite case, ttm
        Car@                                                   tia2l  P-d@tissiona  as  )to  did   throur
            inal could# and would# make consistent per                                                 IL
        out his  -triel.  Prior  to  his  eppreheiision,  lie  he-d  -atvde  statoreats  to  tno  effect
        tlint P. corfos3.ion, to any degree,  elicited  fro.-i  liil-.  would  be  oi)tnined  throu-h
       2 technical motlwds over which he had no control@
              From  the  izifomation  obtained  in  the   "Tablet"   article   which   says   that  It
        is  comnon  knowledre   that   political   prisoners   of   Soviet-occupied   countries   are
        fiven  :Lnterro-sition  dru@-,s,  and  from  other  sources  of  infoz-nation  -   inndequate
        as  the2y  are#  it  is  obvious  that  So7iot-oc.cupied  couittrios   %rep   to   come   oxtont,
        usirw,  druro  to  extrwt  infornation  durine.   tie   lnterroention   or   tlioir   prisonorse
        F     conclusions that can be dream from infor7.nation kvailrblo# tliero is a strong
         l'Old
        -in,liceltion tli#2At these countries may be further edve.-.Ced tlinr,  i-m  mirl-it  care  to
        beltove  In  the  use  of  such  techniques  an  the  use  of  benzedrir-c  (for   the   pro-
        duciiif; of benzedrine alccolorektion and depression), sodium pontotlial (tive so-ortlled
          L-r
                 s2erum")#  -scientific  duress  (tiiird  do-rco  toolmiques)  Knd   tho   use   of
        vnrious do.-roes of liypnotic  sit,--eation.  'Okillfully  wli-iin'@-sterad,,  a:ri  of  t!ie
        txl)ove r.-ontionad t-ocluii:lucs could prove -to  be  iidv-nta:@fiot-to  t2o  tinfriondly  coun-
        "trios,, and extro:,-iely linrtnful to the ofl"orts of @--lic rit.ior.pn.rtj Lnvolved.   It
        viotild appcrxr t!iat ancii CII. c.-iployoe exposed to the l@or,-sil)le -.tse of  @;liose  tech-
        niquos, bocftuso of o-rcrso*3                     sliould bo -;ioll inforn-3d  go  to  his
        deoree o.L' susceptihility. I.-o t@te various procedures and as to li6n 'iio mi-lit rooog-
        nize the a+.tempted use of each process*

                                                                3-
              Chief, Secu:-ity Branoh                                                   24 Februstry 1949
                    Fortunqtoly, i.'vll                otr-n iiot aqi@ally emiscerf-,I'.)le to t!ie vr,.riois
              ijitarrorn%',Ion tooli;-,iqitos -iontio.--,od.        use of bertedr-i.,io loer:. not success-
              fully   cause    the    dosired    reaction in all persons*   Tile use of t@io truth serum
              is,successful   in   between   60,0#    and 75'i@'   of   all   owes   where   used   (exact   statistics
              are  2 not   obtainable)*.   The   use    of the lie detector Is successful In approximately
              @87/;   of   the   cases   "here   used,   subconcious   Isolation    (utilizing    induced    h5,pnoBis
              without t:te stesictiorce of drums) is aticesseful in ox,7proximpitely 25,@. of' tile owes
              involvin-   its'   ittttmijt*,i   tises   Suboot,.ciOU3   isolation   (utilizinm    induced    h,.rpnO3iB
              i--i @-,oniu-mtion vii'l-h drura) is successful in 60;,,'4 to 90i's. of all cases invo'lvlng
              its ntte-.ipted   Use
                    It   in   possible,   throu-h   the   facilities   of   t.ii2s   office,   and    the    utilization
              of   subconcious   i3oloLtion,,   to   comdition   mwW   persons   in    such    e-ma=er    that    they
              are completely unauseeptible or onlylpartially susceptible to a technique to
              which  they were previously vulnerablee
                    In  conjunction  witii  t,@ia   t,,o7o.   it   Is Ru-2C-eatcd  tli@t  a  pro@rn-,n   be   !nil-,ieted
              vr[Lich ro@ild  serve  to  i:,.form  nil  !@,nplicit-ble arlplOyeO   13   to   '-tiS   Susceptibility   to
                                                                        -ruct   Iiim   before   his   departure    con-
              the vo!rious into-rro,-ntio@ techniq,,ios, to ina4L.
              cernin- the recoC--tit4or uf the                      uses,  ac to wh%t counter -.oaouros he
              -nic-lit t@tke  to  nullify   4-@ic   success   of   such an   attol-pt.   end   if    desired,    condition
              h    so  thtt  lie  will   no   lon'-:,Or   be   susceptible   to  2 the   various   unfriendly   interro-
              gation  techniques  to   whicii   he   mi,,-
                                                        .,@it be exposed*
  IC                II is flirther sur-@es,@ei tliptt a. collection rel-,iiromont be iasued to thvt
              t., I i .13 office  ni,-iit  I)e  the  recipient  of  nll   tirt2tilnble   inf-'Ornptloii   co.-iccrninc   tile
                                .@t
              iriterro-:7atibi  too.@Lit-Iiii-3  -iitder  &,,-tusl  use  or  reeatroh   by   u-irrio)ndly   countrio3,
                               oucli info-m"tion, tjiis officg can fit least 1,4.oo   abreut to or
                                                                                           p
              pozaibly 3urpowe those intorro-ation tochni4uoso
                                                    A-

