                       DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, EDUCATION, AND WELFARE
                                             PUBLIC HFALTH  SFSTVICY
                                              9 June 1959
    leadoaal Institiate of Mentsj Health
       Addicti,olk Research Centel
     rr.L PubL!c ReaUb Serrice Hospilal
2                Cautucky
                                t
                   Under separate cover we are forwarding you 2 gm of 1- (beta-
                            oethyl)'2-(p-ethoxybenzy!)      -obenz4midazole
                   diethyla.rain                      -5-nit@
                   methane sulionate (Ba-2068L, i@TIH'7607, APC I-G-2).  This is
2                   an extremeely potent material and care should be used in handling
                   it; soufce was, of course, the Ci"-,a cor,,pany.
                   Also enclosing copy of a preliminary report on the addictiveness
                   of two benzimidazole derivatives which was prepared for
                   Dr. Natl,.an D. Eddy, Secretary of the Drug Addiction Committee.
                   You will note this'report indicates that2 Ea-2c684 is 60 to 100 tires
                   as potent as morphine orally in man.  Good mor-ohine-lixe effects
                   were obtained with a total dose of 0.25 mg.  Dr. Fraser is to
                                              L.       the higher dose range  usi-no
                   explore the dose range, particularly
                   Ithe oral route.  He will also study parenteral administration.
         2          Detailed pharmacological information 'is not yet available, however
                   Ciba has indicated to me that they are preparing a brochure for
                   clinical investigators which will contain all the irfor-,nation.
                   When this is received it will be copied and sent to you.
                   Kindest personal regards,
                                              Yours very sincerely,
                                    5          Harris Isbell,    0.
                                              Director                                      --L
                   Hl:bws
          \3
         @j

