                                                                  October 10. 1966
                    I)ear
                          I have received your letter concerning th-- sourc--s
                         'and v
                         I     ,ishherebytothani-,youv-eryr,-iuch-.  Theinfor,-nationyou
                    supplied seems entirely adequate for our needs both now and in the
        2            future.  Of particular interest are your supgesti=s concerning the
                    possibility of obtaining some of these arixnals
                    I vviu proceed to shake this down and sea what can be done about it-
                    if anything.
                          You seem to have covered this topic so wall that, at this point
                    in *.ixre,, I cannot thinialz of anythi2.-ig else I could possibly ask you to
                    do.  it seems to Me that you have put the mon.t-.ey scuarely on riy
                    bac.'Lt to tal.@ce aclo.-ion and I %vill-proc--ed to do so.. I am tal,-,i-,Ig the
                    liberty of sandin- a copy of your letter
                          I hope that I.-hin-s continue to move along smoothly with the
 2                   ranja element. and shall be loolzin,,, forward with Yrcat aiit-,,cipation
                                                                        0
                    toafielddemaiistration.  Idiscussadt.';isviith'                 1-,Vhen
                    he la3t visited Iiere.  I think we have a workable field tasting plan
                    worl.,,cd out.
                                                                             il'All Pet's
                    '.%Iagaziiie". I, unfortunately, do not have a copy of eitlier tho
                    ma,:,azine or the article
                       Q                               . lassures me It ca-.ro outvvitliin
                    the lat3t two or three rr-,on0ths.
                          Best re-arda to all.

