                                CENTRAL
                                            INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
                                           WASHINGTON IS- 0-  C-'                          rues-
                                                                                         209ok
                                                  -THE ID I Jt E C T 0 A
                                        OFFICE OF                          25 APR 9   Brr
2                                                                                          onomat
                                                                                      viis cind.T
                     MEMORANDUM FOR:           7he Honorable J. Edgar Hoover
                                                     tor, Federal Bureau of Livest
                                               Di
                       SUBJECT         2          rainwashing
                          7ne attached study on brainwashing was prepared by  my
                                    nse to the increasingly acute interest In the
                       staff In respo
                                          the Intelligence and security componenti
                       subject throughout
                                       enL I feel you will find It well worth y
                       of the Goverrm         2                                  our
                       personal attention. It represents the thinking of leading p'
                       chologists, psychiatrists and intelligence specialists, ba-se-d-
                       In turn on interviews with many Individuals who have had
        7.
                       personal experience with Communist brainwashing, and on
                       extensive reeearch and testing. While Individual isp6ci2alists
                       bold divergent views on various  aspects  of  this-  mosf  complex
                       siubject, I believe the study reflects a synthesis  of  mtjoriq'@@
                       expert opinion. I will,  of  course,  appreciate  any  com-menid
                       on It that you or your  staff  may  have.
                                                     1 4
                                        2                              Director
                     Sun
            INCLO
                                                                                                   C
                                                                          600
                                       7f.-
                       Atta&taent.-
                                                 IN  l@EXED-61,
                          CSD                  4                    X  MAY
                                                   od
6@'7' 1                                               r
                                                               -7:'
                                                                                      '71

                                                                        power
                                                   mom*
                                  40
                                                            9"Y "Mxkeit
                                                        TAOTA                       v
                                                  WPX           TWOO'Ecq
                                                                rwr T T
                                                  xammv               is= 7rdEm

                            "We know now that men can be mad  to do exilctly
                            any-thing ...... It's all a qmstion of finding
                            the right means. If onlv ve take  enough  trouble
                            and go sufficiently slowly,, we can nnk him  kill
                            his aged parents and eat then in a stev.w
                            (Jules Romains.  VERDUN.  A2.A. Knopf, 1939.,
                            P. 156.)
                                 TUs  study should not be read as representing
                            the synthesis in the Centrul Intelligence  Agency
                            on the subject of br-ainwasbin . Several  working
                            groups in CIA axe activelv concerned with the subject.,
                            and this paper re8flects the progress so far me4e by
                            only one of those groups.  It in not a final report.

                                       OONTCNTS
                                                                               Paw
           PORCWCOD  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
           Tv",)DUCTTON
                  Scope and Ain            0 o o o
                  General orientation . * o o o *                                2
    2                  OF = PFaBEim . .     0 0 . 0 .  0 0 0 0                    3
                      CormL                0 0 * & 0  . . 0 .                  10
                  The suspect . . . .  e                           . . . . .   10
                  The Accumlation of Evidence     . . . . . . . . .
                  fte Arrest Prmed=e     . . . . . . 2. . . .                   13
                  2he Detention Prison   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     14
                  The Regimn Within the Detention Prison                       15
                  The ltffects of the pegimn in the isolation Ce3 I            18
                  other Aspects of the isolation Resdue  .  . . . . . . . .    23
                  fte Interrogator   . . . . . . . . . . . . 2. .               26
                      rrogatim     .          .          .          .           27
                  Press   s Applied by the Interrogator    . . . . . . . . .   34
                  The *ftiendly Appro"h"                                       3T
                                                                               39
                  The Oaurse of tbe Interrvosti5on    . . . . . . . . .
                  The Imterrogator's Point of Viev and
                       Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

                                                                                                                                              
%uO% t.-
                                                                                 4b
                                                                                  4i
                                                                                                                                        8      
ri
                                                                                                                43                             
431

                                                   FCMWDRD
                            Brainvashin , as a term, was originated by a reporter
                        vho van interviewing Chinese refugees.  it has gained world-
                        wide currency and has been applied to a wide range of tech-
                        niquea--mass education of a Cmmmigitic country or citizens.,
           2             thoughtcontrol in Soviet and sate" ite countries, techniques
                        of eliciting informtion,, as vell as the intensive i=U-
                        viAi,Alized re-education of beliefs of a few selected
                        individuals.  Such uncritical use of the term has done
                        nothing to reduce the impact on the public and officialdm
                        generally of the co2nfessions of such men as CarAin&l MindSZenty
                        and especially of the results of treatment of prisoners-of-var
                        by the Chinese Coommists.
                            The teru itself is anxiety producing.  Its connotation
                        of special oriental knowledge of drugs, hypnosis, and other
                        exotic and devious means of controlling hi---n behavior creates
                        credulity a    the uninformed.  A more prosaic view is that
                        the techniques used in producing confessions and *conversions"
                        am readily understandable in terms of ordinary psychological
                        principles and have been used., especially by police states,,
                        for centuries.  It is now clear that Russian methods of

                       obtaini    information and confessions bglye      developed  by
                       XYD and earlier versions of this orgmization over the eenturies,
                       but especially during the Past 35 years of systematic effort to
                       elicit information or confessions.  The Chinese have their own
                       tradition of tolera2nce for brutality.  They am influenced by
                       the Russians., but place more emphasis on converting the prisoner
                       to Ccom=istic beliefs, at times  behaving  as  typical  "eager-
                       beaver" revolutionaries.  In am., the methods are police methods
                       developed by trial and error to suit the needs  of  the  police
                       state.  No scientists., no drugs, no hypnosis,2, no new psychologicel
                       principles have as yet been involved.
                            Early in the rev ev of the diverse information catalogued
                       under the term "brainvashing", even in serious scientific
                       articles,, it became evident there vils a need for better coordingl-
                      ition of the vork on this topic and more work d:Lrected at kipee2-ific
                      'problems and issues. It vas.,  therefore  concluded  that  this
                       limited effort vas best devoted to (1) clarifying the concepts
                       connoted by the term brainvashing; (2)   relating these to svc'n
                       basic psychological principles as learning, perception., and
                       notivation; and (3) specifically discussing the brainvashe1d
                       person as an involuntarily re-educated person.
                            A3.1 people are being  re-.educated continuously.  Nev
                       information changes one"s beliefs.  Everyone has experienced to
                                                     ii

                                                         TTT
                          'tv  PMTV  BOUbTuqDQ4  UT  UT*J*D   O!t   BJO'4dv*   JO   2980ftTTTTJL
                         PM  SRPOTJLOU3[  Dq!@  UO  P=  TMMT.ATPUT  aq4   Jo   "u*T-zadxo   'puv
                          1,4TTvaoiu;ad Ileou*BTTT*,4uT  oq,.@  no  gpuedop  q.T  'pentiop  2Avq
                             GA  91  BuiqgvAuTvjq  o,4  ,,CTesTvj  isse.Tuoo  o,4  Iuo,;,4v=ojuT
                              '4TOTTO 0'4 92'4"n'4v 0'4 '40val TTT-A 2TWiPTATPUT WE
                                  *SZHOMM 709=0 AD SIgnM a% uT VaqT-zogop
                          "sw;2aq   uoT-4vorq)a-az   aqq.   "q@nod   ST%   I.V   onv;s    pwnjwo
                2             ATTnjuTvd  *Tq  Vue  004   SOGPM=D   qOTqA   WV';   zo   umued   km:
                                                                                                1
                          C4  tEq=OAV;  '),*VW  00:@  gPv--a  ST  Tvn'PTATPuT  Gq'4   "uOTStVUOO!
                         V=   A=2QP=dgP   9=1'4.XO   004   Paw'P"    usqa    'SMqJOq.    TVOTBLqd
                             SSET'@-@   P=   'B@-109   SWT-=A   JO    UOTIxL&Tzd--V    '=T4vTOOT
                     ,IwfiT"j   "Tevaoxe   ;o   aoT-4oupozd 2  ou   samsvm   qous   Aq   pakoma.1
                               .zo I)aonpoi uaaq svq  4u--,mgprtr  Tvo,;-4T-zo  Jo  Cq.TTTqTssod
                                     guo;4TPWO   I)OT-EOJ,4=0   AT&ATqxT=   zap=    uTq    uod2cl
                             "=OJ   ST   UOT,4=Llojn   qxga,4sTs=on   a%   4vq,4   uT    sjajjtp
                              (Offmm mw uT) poqswwtwq sq!@ Jo souatzadxa aiM
                                                                                            'PTO
                             eq,.@ RITA JLDU GR4 ftT4Sa.1-4UT Aq os up Au= fzaq-:@ouv  jo
                         9=m  --100  tq  Q.OTTZUOO  4%  "TOO'-Iz  Oq@   -*Tqv   Own   sTv"TATpUT
                           "am  .   *=,ST-1--dxs  TI=OU   I   ST   STU   -MO-EO-WT.   T*oTq.TTod
                          P= 'galcu xsQ 'UOTBTTOX gm =mtqozd vims q4-;A!p                 oolaoo
                        an*-otseq v ItTuToadso 'SaTTaq zo!;          v  q4TA  Vg-,y,@spmoo  .40a
                         2-OOT'49=Ojn A= U          sam:ua   4vqq-   @OTTJWDQ   0%   saaap    ems

                      deliberately destroyixtg the integration of a personality.
                      With such willingness., there appears little doubt that an
                      individv,sl cm be broug'at pay   logically to tbw point where
                      involunt4u7 re-education will ta    place.  Up to nov., po3.iee
          2            methods developed by trial and error have not fully exploited
                      the psychological basis for results thus  far  obtained;  nor
                      have all restraints in treatment of prisoners been cast aside.
                      Dote,, too., that the restmints referred to need not concern
                      direct physical torture.  It is not necessary to use direct
                      physical means to reduc2e a person to a state where involuntary
                      re-education cm take place.
                           Brainwashing conceived as inrolxmtoxy re-education., them.,
                      represents one extreme of a continuum of  treatment  by,  and
                      resistance to.,captors.  At the other end of this scale is
                      active voluntary collaboration with  the  en2emy.  In  between
                      a-re varying degrees of brutality and subtlety  of  treatment
                      and degrees of resistance thereto.  Clearly., policies
                      concerning treatment of repatriated captives will depend on
                      where the ind:LvidvALl Is placed on this scale. At one  end.,
                      there is the legal jurisdiction for treason; at  the  other.,
  6                    psychiatric treatment.
                           The view presented herein has several implications.
                      First,, the public should be given information which will

                       dispel th@.- iwwtery vhi appears to have surrounded the concept
                       of brainvathing.
                            Second,, them re     ible for establishing  policy  for
                       returned prisoners bwft as a first problem the determination
                       vhere an the scale between invvlmt=7 re-edwmtion and
                       voluntary collaboration a particular indiridual stands.
                            Third, the hmm organism need not  be  a  complete  pavn
                       of his environment until extz em conditions are created.  Van
                       is &"ptive., and v:Lth mr,,mp kawledge of vbat to expect f2rm
                       his captors and anunderstanding of his own reactions,, be caa
                       develop memo of resisting.  Be can be helped in this by
                       'prior knowledge of the treatment he can expect and his  own
                       ,reactions to it.
                            Fourth, the truly brainvasked is a psychiatric,, not  a
                       La&&! D.-LG,-Wlam.  xi& treatment should be therapeutic., not
                       Ipunitive.  Recovery can be anticipated since the bminvwphed
                       person placed in his normal environment vi3.1 tend to revert
                       to his prior beliefs.
                            Fifth
                                   brainvashing can be successftl3.y acccopliebed on
        7               the basis of present knowledge by anyone sufficienuv
                       t
                       ,in+.er-es+.ed in acquiring an vaderstanding of -the psychological
                       principles iwrolved.
                            Sixth., it is possible that Uw best long range defense

                      against br@@hing is to aske It politically diindyantageous
                      for a comtrr to permit its
                           Whi3.e this paper focuses its attention an brainvashing
                      as defined., the political nature of its effects      it
                      ,necessary to consider the effects of militaz7 and otbez
      2                i
                      .policy.  Where certain possibi3.ities occur naturally in
                      the psychological context,, they ex* mationed.  The major
                      purpose., bovever., Is to discuss 'brainvashing frou a psy-
                      chological point of view.  It is not pmsumed that this
                      v,iev takes into aceo=t all the factors needed i2n determi-
                      ning policy.
                                                  *I

                                                                                                                          Ci.                  
Oak
                                                        1-h
                                               IL+                                                                                             
ob
                                                               2                                                                               
e
                                                                                                                                               
C2
                                                        Pt
                                                                                     2                                              it       -t
                                                                                                                                            c
                                                                                    a                                              IOC
                                                                                    0
                                                                      2                                          a                  r&       0 
lot
                                                                                                                                               
0
                                                                                                                                   H        In
                                                                      6                                                             H

                      intellectual orgmaization of the indivi&-i personality has
                      eamate& from maiversities and other private research insti-
                      tutions &wing the past decade.  Appropriate selections from
                      this material have been applied to understanding brainvasbivk
                      General Orientation
           2               This study has been written  as  a  general  analysis  of  the
                      available material.  It. is recogilized that agencies engaged
                      in intelligence collection have utxique operational vulner-
                      abilities in dealing with Soviet interrogation and brain-
                      washing.  Individ-ml  forced2 to confess to having engaged in
                      espionage or sabotage embarrass national policy planners.
                      While these problems am recognized,,  no  attempt  has  been  made
                      in this study to provide specific practical guidance.
                           This study is  written  frm  the  viewpoint  of  professional
                      psychology.  As a systematic approach.. this ha2s not been
                      done before, although @     previous analyses have,,  of  course.,
                      md  sow use of psychological ideas.  The present approach
                      attempts to =Lke fall  use  of  current  psychological  principles
                      in explaining the process of b
                           It is reasonable to expect that the    Soviets will conti8nue
                      to refine their wthods,, and that  we  shall  continue  to  secure
                      more kzbovledge about the imbjept.  There should., therefore., be
                      periodic reappraisals of bminv&shing in the future.
                                                      2

                                       STATDMNT OF MM PROBL10(
                          As ve shall shw lat4wr in tklis- chapter,, tb& tem *brain@-
                     vashine has a very useful meaning from the standpoint of vbat
                     goes on inside the person vho is brainvasbed.  If the pzoces
                     had be= vieved in this light from the beginning., no doubt ve
                     would by now have achieved a greater and more widespread uztder-
                     standing of it.  Actmlly., it has not been confronted in so
                     simple a menwr as that.  It has been used by the Soviets
                     and the Chinese on qulte different, kinds of peop2le and for
                     quite a variety of    sons.  It has bad a wide range of
                     consequences., scm intended and perhaps wm unintended.
                     It has faced intelligence,, military and political leaders
                     with a remrkably wide range of problems with vhich each such
                     group had to cope.  A3.1 2these variations of objectives., con-
                     sequences,, and problems have a&& for confusion in our efforts
                     to understand vbat vas really going on.
                          WesUz,a usage of the tezu brainvashing has caused it to
                     be applied      time to time to each of the following sitmtions:
                        3       (1)  IndiTidual or group indoctrination of the
                          "maseau behind the Iron Curt&:Ln.
                               (2)  Jadoctrination of key personnel inside Commint-
                          controlled countries to maintain their political reliability.

                                (3)  Mb-- interrolptim PrOee" bY vblich P*Gitiv'&
                          inforiation of intellivnee valm is obtained frm
                          iwuvid=ls
                                @4)  aroup indoctrination of prisoners-of-var.  Begifts
                          an &tteap2t to obtain defections and dewralize milit4uT
                          persowmi, this process appears to bave been used as a
                          selective device to ascertain vhich "progressives' or
                          NopWrtunists' might subsequentlv be amenable to a more
                          int,owi" process as defined in (5) be3.ov.
                                (5)  The intensive indiridml process   during vhich
                          individual  are deprived of their critical faculties and
                          subsequmtly come to believe as true that  vtlich.,  prior  to
                          the 'brainvaahing., they would have designated " false.
                          fte fact that the tezu 2"brainvashing"  has  been  applied  to
                     so =my situatime has caused a great deal of confusion in
                     Utt"           &C&ra
                          1*,4n& t- I     more about, It and in attaxptixtg to  develop
                     sound praet ices and policies for coping vith it.  As ve $ball
                     ex
                       plain more2 fuuy In this study., ve find the term *brain
                     vasb±W to be =us umful vton It is applied strictly to
                     denote the lnvoL!E!lg re-education of an individual
                     vhich a         is developed in the  perceptual  and  intellectual
                     o@rgluization of his personality so that be will:

                                    Accept as true certain ideologesa principles
                          vblieh h@-- voula not have accepted as true prior to the ch&W,
                          aztd/or
                               (2) Admit that certain events have a true and f&ctwa
                         basis VMCK be VCV2ld not have admitted foz@r3,v.  These
                         false b&li*fs my be t     itOrY-  LI fact, there :Ls good
                         reason to believe that the false beliefs resulting frm
                         brainvashing vill break dovu slxmtaneouslv vhm the
                         individml has been removed for a period of time frc2a the
                         oppmesive controls.
                         It should be noted that brainvashing., so defined, does
                    not amphagize ftat happens to the individualp but vbat happens
                    vithin him.  Mie change represents a mie or less complete
                    ze-education of his value-Vat4m.  nis cb&ngo is brovot &bout
                    in & riOdlY controlled Ouviro=wnt using pressures desigwd
                    to create and sharmn internal conflict vithin the individual.
                    Mw imUv:Ld=Ll is forced to resort to problem-solving be-
                    b&v2ior., and the net effect is the brainvasbed state.  Wo
                    al-n4t&neous processes am present.  Mm first is character:Lzed
                    by a progressive deterioration and demobilization of the
                    individuallser:Ltical and Judging capacities.  I,& & true sense
                    the lnd:Lvidml loses all sense 9of perffpective.  The second
                    PRMCBB is the learning of beliefs he vould previoun4 have
                                                5

                        rejected., as he seeks to gain some structure for his ex   ling
                       ,personality. The criteria of  success  of  brainwashing  am:
                                  (1) fte observed conviction  and  sincerity  viiit
                             which the individnal expreefts his  changed  icleoloa
                             and beliefs concerning palpable events.
                                  (2) The length of  time  his  changed  beliefs  am
                             maintained after the individual has been  removed  from
                             the control environment.
                                  (3) The amount of surprise  and  confusion  that
                             accomqxlnies his "discovery" that he has been  brain-
       2                      washed during his subsequent recovery.
                             Indoctrination., and even education, can lead to  false
                        beliefs. These processes are most  effective  when  the  in-
                        diTiduLl has gap* in his knowledge.. or his imd  ratanding  of
                        the meaning of certain events is sufficiently  tenuous  that
                        he ha2s little difficulty in accepting a  new  and  different
                        interpretation. Brainvashing., however,, involves the  re-
                        education of veU-esUbliabed  beliefs;  and  implies  that  the
                        Individual resisted the re-education.  It is this very
                        resistance with its concomitant internal confli2ctj,  we  main-
                        tain., which is the very core of brainwashing.
                             In the process of securing  information  of  inte3.lige=e
                        value., the procedures used by the Commists, although

                       admittedly harsh,, do not appear to differ subStA3nt-i gkl I  frOM
                       those customarily used in eliciting military information.
                       The systematic            ion of captives does not appear to
                       be a major objoctive.
                            An underst4Lnding of brainwashing is important in several
                       contexts, among which are the fol3.oving:
                                  (1)  intelligence might be more fully protected if
                             military and other personnel subject to capture could
                             understand brainvashing and could be trained as well an
                             possible to cope 2with it.
                                  (2)  Dealing properly with brainvashed individuals
                             depends heavily on understanding their condition.  For
                             the truly brainwashed, psychiatric treatment in In order;
                             for the deliberate defector, legal processes axe
                             appropriate.
                                   (3) Mm prope@2pnda-valut of false confessions has
                             been gr"t., and the fear-prodneing impact of "brain-
                              vashine in the public -inA is a matter worth considerable
                              concern.  Public understanding of the process sboul& belp
                              considerably.
                       7            (4) A clear understanding of the process is
                              important if governmental agencies axe to @'k  rap:L4L
                              progress toward further research an(I understanding, od

                            to db'ml" emaistent policies to n"t the pmbllm of
                            br&Lmva"ing.
                            lb,eh of these o'bjeeti"s of greater im  rgtanding is
                       ImPOrtAzt-  The propagw0a-,ralm of false confessions ani the
                       P"blic 82zi'OtY concerning br&im"hing locu,, howyer, as mjor
                       Preoccupations.  Statements of brainvashed individuals have
                       been a abarp-edeed tool in the comwnint ympa@pndgl iit.
                       Everything frcn the pa-ges of the b2rainvusbed *old re.
                       lUt:LOD&ries' in the late '30's to the Korean gem vaeam
                       admissions has adranced the Soviet strategy line.  possibly
                       One Of the greatest advantages for the Coommisto in the par
                       East has been to lover Cauemian prestige.  Another and ev
       2                more leffeftite ProPaganft goal may be the creation of a oute
                       of fear vithu the populace of vestern-bloc nations.  The
                       c=czl;,L. oJ-6* bi-slww-ushing is frightening.  Mothers of wnsp vho
                       So into militu7 "rviee against the S2oriets or Minese,, wast
                       concern themselves v:Lth the fact.. not only that their sms
                       my be kil2ed or vowided, but that their mntal procemms
                       my be distorted if they are captured.  ihst as knoviedge
                       that the Soviets have thermonuclear veapons has dam
                                                       6                 .pened the
                       national feeling of security., so brainvashing.bas created
                       the belief that our oppommtsrwm mysteriously formidable.
                       fte "man-in-the-streeto is not so reamd frca pre-scientific
                                                   8

                                                 C
                        beliefs that suth processes as brainwashing fail to arouse
                        emotions bordering on superstitions ave.
                             We turn now to a more detailed explamtion of @hwt vbat.
                        happens to the mind and body of  the  demoralized  and  dis-
                        orgolnized perso2n vbo can properly be  described  as  brain-
                        vashed,, and to a consideration of how  this  allte  c=  be
                        brought about. We obf-11  describe  the  general  processes
                        involved in changing the behavior and  the  beliefs  of  an
                        individual  vbm  his  envirmmnt  can  be  fully   emtrolled.
        2                These processes am complex and they involve the basic
                        principles of lea=ing, perception, motivation,, and physio-
                        logical deprivation.
                             Implications of these findings for policy and practice
                        in various areas will not be spelled out in detail.  Some
                        such implications., of course., vould need to be Integr2ated
                        vi-t,h other t,@o=iderations in arriving at a final  policy.
                        Some,, on the other bond,, appear to  point  overwhelmingly
                        tov4Lrd certain specific policies and practices.  For emnpie.,
                        the treatment of brainwashed repatriates should clearly be
                        supportive rather th0an punitive.  This study should provide
                        useful guidance and helpful points of viev in a number of
                        important areas.

                                      COMMMST CONTROL TECEINIQMS
                            Ullaerstanding brainvashing as a phenomenon   a
                       phenomenon vhich culminates in a false confession, delivered
                       vith conviction and humility, to antisocial intent and
                       specific criminal acts -- requires both a 2knovledge Of
                       Comminist control techniques and an analysis of their impact
                       Upon the 12ormuLl personality.  This section describes the
                      battery Or Pressures applied to the prisoner and his
                      behavioral reactions to these control pressures.  In the
                      fOllOving section an attempt is neae to analyze the psycho-
                      logic&2 impact of these assaults upon the personality during
                      the course of the brainvashing.
                      The Suspect
                           Those vho fall under the suspicion or the KVD usually
                      have acme reason for exciting its suspicion.  Although the
                      suspect nay not knov vby be is suspected, th2e MVD has some
                     reason for singling him out.  Because or the broad nature of
                     Soviet lave,, and the free na=er in vhich the MD can
                     interpret these,, any "ouspeetn h&g Co=itt" BOW "crim
                     agilizkst the state" as the MVD defines the term.
                          The implications of this statement are significant.  In
                    0 a nation In vhich the state ovus all property, vbere everyme
                                                10
                                                     rL

                        vorks ror the state., and vhere only approv d  opinions  mq  be
                        held, a person vho has accidentallv broken or lost some of
                        the "people's property",, vho has made a mistake., who has  not
                        worked bard enough, vho Ms talked to a roreigner, or vbo has
                        merely express2ed vbat he inferred was an i=ocent opinion,,
                        may be ipso facto guilty of a -crime  aga4nst  the  state."  In
                       practice,, this mean  that almost anyone vithin the Soviet
                       Uaion may be suspected by the MVD at any time,,  and  that  wbm-
                       ever be is suspected the MVD is always able to assign a
                       specific reason for its suspicions.
                       The Accumulatioa of Eridence
                            According to Conamist ideology, no one may be arrested
                       =less there is evidence that be is a criminal.
                            According to the practice of the MVD this man  that
                      vhen an i=Uvidml falls under the suspicion or an mm
                      officer2.. this officer ut3  accmmmlate "evidence" that the
                      individual is & "Criminal" and take this evidence to the    state
                      Prosecutor, vho on    then issue a warrant berore the arrest
                      can be carried out.  The investigating officer accuralates
                      evidence shoving that the victim bad & reason to  be  7&  criminal
                      (i.0-P that he was a member of a suspect group) by accuwAlatIng
                     the statements Or $pies and lnf*rumts  vith  regard  to  him.,  if
                     this evidence is not sufficient to satisfy the officer he places
                                                  3-1

                       the suspect and his frienda and associates under  surveillmln
                       These friends and associates may be arrested and held for
                       interrogation in order to supply eridence against  the  suspect,
                       the reason for their arrest being that they are associates of
                       a suspect.. and therefore suspect themselves.
2                            Covert surveill&" e and the arrest of associates are
                       carried out carefully., but they cannot alwye be  concealed  from
                       the suspect. He may become avam of it  or  his  friend  may  tell
                       him.  As he becomes a marked mAn in the eyes of his friends.,
                       they begin to avoid him. Their demeanor  someti2mes  indicates  to
                       his that he is under suspicion. The knowledge that  he  vill  be
                       arrested,, without knmledge of when this will occur.,  obviously
                       creates anxiety in the intended victim.  Although  XVD  officers
                       km= about the psychological effect which surveillolm e  has  upon
                  2     suspect$., and make use of it, they probably do not u" it  with
                       the calculated mmii* that the victim sometimes supposes.
                       The poorly concealed surv illmce and the  arrest  of  friends
                       and associates., followed by an indefinite period before  the
                       arrest of the -,ain suspect., are not neces5sarily  stW  maneuvers
                       to frighten the victim. They are often  evidences  of  rather
                       slow and cluu7 police activities.
                            YARberi of the MD compete with each other in trying to
                       turn up suspects and sec    their  conviction.  To  a  certau
                                                    10

                     extent,, off ieers are judged by the muiber of arrests vtlich  they
                     obtain.  Since Constmist theory demakds that no perwm be
                     arrested excey  v     it is clear that he is a  criminal,  office.L
                     vho arrest mn vho must later be released are subject to censure.
                     They have made a mistak , becau2se they have arrested a man vho
                     is not a criminal.
                          The c=sequmms are important from the point of viev of
                     the victim.  In effect, any -ri vho is arrested is automatically
                     in the position of  being  guilty.  Anyone  arrested  by  the  M
                     must know that in the ey" of the Soviet state,,  and  in  the  eyes
                    2 of those vbo have arrested his,, he is a 'crimin 1".  Mw only
                     question to be settled after the arrest in  the  extent  of  his
                     criminal activity and the precise  nature  of  his  crimes.  The
                     officers in charge of his case,, both those vho  have  nade  the
                     arrest and those vho will carry out the interrogation, have
   2                  a personal interest in seeing that the arrested man oak a a
                     prmp  and extensive confession, for their own reputations are
                     at stak .
                     The Arrest ProcedvLre
                          According to Cr-inist theory., men should be arrested in
                     such mu2ner as not to cause then embarrassment, and the police
5                     should carry out arrests in a maimer vhich does not mnduly
                     disturb the population. For more tholn tventy  years  it  has  been
                                                    13

                      the practice of the Russian State Police to seize their suspects
                      in the sidd3.e of the night.  The "addnigbt Imock on the door"
                      has become a standard episode in fiction about Russia.  The
                      police are well aware of the fact that the intended victia,,
                      forewarned by his previous surve"'A- 2e and the changing attitude
                      of his friends., is further terrified by the thought that be my
                      be avakened from his sleep almost any night and tairen away.  It
                      is customary for the arresting officer to be accooqxinied by
                      several other men.  Be usually reads to the prisoner the arrest
                      warrant i2f there is one.  It does not., of course, specify the
                      details of the crimes mmitted.  The prisoner Is then taken
                      prcuptly-to a detention prison.
                      The Detention Prison
                           In most of the large cities of the Soviet thion the MD
                      operates detention prisons.  2bese prisons contain only perwma
                      under "invest2igation",, whose cases have not yet been sett3.ed.
                      7he most modern of these prisms are separate inatitatims.,
                      well built and spotlessly clean.  In addition to the cells for
                      the prisoners,, they contain offices for the XYD units,, rooms in
                      which interrogations are carried out.,5 and other rooms., usually
                      in the basement,, in which prisoners are executed when such
                      Punishment is decided qpm.  Mwre are attached medical facilities,
                      and room for the cam of the sick detainees.  An exercise yard is
                      a standard facility.

                           The typical cell is a =all cubicle., about 10 feet long by
                      6 feet wide,, containing a single bunk and a slop jar.  It usually
                      has no other furnishings.  Its vaus are barren., and it is
                      lighted by a single electric lamp in the ceiling.  One wall
                      usually contains a smell window above eye level, frcm whic2h the
                      prism r can see nothing of his outside environment.  The door
                      contains a peephole through which the guard in the corridor
                      outside my observe the prisoner at will without the prisoner's
                      knowledge.  Such typical cells will not., of course, be found in
                      all prisons and especially not in those which are old or
                      impr2ovised, but the general aspect of barrenness and complete
                      lack of access to the outside world is characteristic.
                      The Regimen Within the Detention Prison
                          The arresting officers usually do not give the prisoner
                      the reason for his arrest beyond that in the warrant which they
                      read to him.  They usuallt search hin and also search2 the place
                      in which he lives.  They then take hin directly to the prison.
                      Here he Is asked a few questions about his identity., and personal
                      valuables and his outer clothing ezv taken from him.  These am
                      carefully cat4Llogued and put away.  Be my or my not be given a
                      prison imi or&.2  He is usually examined by a prison physician
                      shortly after his incarceration.
                                                 15

                             The entire introd=tion to the detention  prism  is  brief
                        and in carried on without explanation. Within a  few  hours  after
                        his arrest the prisoner finds himself locked up within iL ce-U.
                             Prisoners within detention cells follow a rigid  regimen.
                        With scm variatio2ns this regimen is standard throughout the
                        Soviet Lbion,, and has been adopted by nearly all Ccawmist
                        countries.  Ilhe rigidity of the re;dnen any be relaxed or
                        tightened by the direction of the interrogator.
                             An almost invariable feature of the management of W
                        important suspect under detention is a p2eriod of  total  isolation
                        in a detention cell. The priamer is placed withiv, his  eell,,
                        the door is shut., and for an indefinite period he is totally
                        isolated from bn-*,n contact except by the specific direction of
                        the officer in ebarge of his case. He is not allowed to  talir  to
             2           the gmrds or to ccmmmicate with other  prisoners  in  any  manner.
                        When be is taken fran his cell for any ressm he is accompanied
                        by & guerd.  If another pri    r approaches through  the  corridor
                        he turns his face to the wall until the other prisoner bas
                        passed.
                2             The hours and routine of the priamer am rigidly organized.
                        Be is avakene& early in the morning and given a abort period in
                        which 'bo voa;h himself . ELe food is brought to him. He ben a
                        short and fixed time in vhich to eat It; the standard dlet  is
                                              0       16

                         just adequate to Mint4lin nutrition.  Be must clean himself and
                         police his ovn ce3.1; but be is not &Uoved enough time to keep
                         it spotlessly clean. At some time in the morning he usually has
                         an exercise period. Typically# his exercise consists of walking
                   2      alone in the exercise yard. If be is in rigid isolation,, be my
                         not be allowed to exercise at all. He is usually alloved a slop
                         jar in his call vhich be can utilize for defecation and urinationl,
                         but sometimes this is taken avay.  Then he must call the guard
                         and perhaps wait for hours to be taken to the latri2ne.
                             At all times except when he is eating,, sleeping,, exercising,.
                         or being interrogated, the prisoner is left strictly alone in
                         his cell. Be has nothing to do,, nothing to read,, and no me to
                         talk to.  U2der the strictest regimen he my have to sit or
                         stwd in his cell in a fixed positim all day.  He my 2sleep
                         only at hours prescribed for sleep.  Mwn be must go to bed
                         prcoqft.ly when told and must lie in a fixed position qpon his
                         back with his 'HAna  outside the blanket..  If be deviates from
                         this position, the guard outside will avaken his and make him
                         resme It.  2be 32.ight in his cell bums constantly.  He =at
                         sleep with his face constantly tovard it.
                              :Ef the pri   r become ill., be in taken to a prism
                         pbysician by vbca be is treated with the beat medical care avail-
                         able according to the prat-iiees cc== to  Soviet  medicine.  If
      0                                                17
                                         . . .......                                         .... ....

                         necessary., he my be placed under hospital care; but as soon as
                         he has recovered the regiinen will be resumed.
                              Priso3ers am not allowed to commit suicide.  7hose vbo
                         attempt to do so are thvarted and carefully nursed until they
                         recover; the2n the regimo--n is resumed.
                              DL-viatims from the prescribed regimen are prckptly
                         noticed by the gwlrds and are punished.  Disturbed behavior is
                         punished also.  :Ef this bebav-ior persists and the officer in
                         charge of the case is convinced that the prisoner has becone
                        2 mentally ill,, the =Lu my be placed imd r medical care until  his
                         health bw returned; then the regimen is resumed.
                              Mis regimen vithin the detention cell is in itself a most
                         potent vtmpon in the ha"da of the MVD.  It has been developed
                         and refined over a period of many y2ears and used on literally
                         thousands of prisoners. It is highly effective in "break-[in  the
                         vi2.1" of prisonezo -- so wach so that many XVD officers am
                         convinced that there is literally no mn vbo cannot be brou&t
                         to do their bidding.
                         7he Effects of the RESIES in the Isolation CeU
                              7he effects of this regimen upon prisoners are striking.  It
                         has been mentioned that the =m vho has been arrested by  the  XYD
                         is us=3.ly intensely apprehensive. Often be has known  for  weeks
                         that be vftu-be amoatod but ha& WA-so  cOLear  kwwledge  of  vimm
                                                      18

                       or for what reason.  Ik has been seized in the middle of the
                       night and taken without explanation to prison.  He knows that no
                       friend can help him and that the MM my do with him what they
                       please.
                            A major aspect of his prison experience is isolation.  Mm
                       is a social2 aninml; he does not live alone.  From birth to death,
                       he lives in the company of his fellov -%in.  ELs relations with
                       other people and., especially with those closest to him., are
                           at as im
                                   ,portant to him as food or drink.  When a man is
                       totally isolated,, he is removed fi-cm all of the interpersonal
 2                      relations which are so important to him and taken out of the
                       social role which sustains him.  His internal as well as his
                       externgl life is disrupted.  Exposed for the first time to total
                       isolation in an MVD priscm., he develops a predictable group of
                       syzpt,me, which might &I  at be cal2led a "disease syndrvae'.
                       The guards and XYD officers are quite familiar with this
                       syndrome.  They watch each new prison r with technical interest
                       as his syzptcms develop.
                           The initial appearance of an arrested prisoner is one of
                       bewilderment.  For a fev hours, he mav sit quietly in his cell
9                       looking confused and dejected.  But within a short time =at
                       prisoners beccm alert and begin to take an interest in the:Lr
                       environwzt.  Emy react with expectancy when anyow approaches
                                                   19

                          the door to the cell.  They sbov interest ud anxiety as they am
                          exposed to each n" feature of the prison routine.  Mwy my
                          questions or begin conversations. Scme U&ke deman"a*  they
                          to b2ov vby they are being held) and protest that they  am
       2                   innocent.  if they are foreign nationa3 . they my insist IJPM
                          seeing their consular officers.  Some take a "you can't do this
                          to =11 attitude.  Scoe pass through a brief period of obouting.,
                          threatening., and demanding. All of this is alvays sternly
                          repressed.  If need2 be., the officer in charge of the cam vi3.1
                          see the prisoner., remind him of the routine, threaten himl vith
                          punisbuent,, and punish him if he does not subside.  During this
                          period the prisoner has not yet appreciated the full import of
                          his situation.  Be tries to fraternize vith the guexds.  He
     2                     leaves part of his food if he does not like it.  He tries to
                          speak to prisoners vhm be passes in the corridors and reaches
                          back to close the door behind his vben be is taken to  the
                          latrine.  The guards refer to this as the period-of getting
                          flacclizatized' to the prism routine.
                               After a2 few days it beccoes apparent to the prisome  that,
                          his activity av&Us his nothing and that he vill be punished or
                          reprimanded for even the omllest breaches of the routine.  go
                          vanders vbm be vM be released or questicned.  His requests
                          have been listens& to but never acted Wm.  He becomes
                                                       20

                       increasingly &=ious and restless and his sleep Is disturbed.
                       Be begins to look up alertly when arqone passes in the corridor.
                       He JtWo vben the guard comes to the door.  He becomes adjusted
                       to the routine in his cell and goes through it punctiliously but
                       be still leaves some of his food and occasionally 2reveals by
                       small gestures his lack of ccuplete submission  to  his  environ-
                       ment.
                            The period of anxiety., hyperactivity and  apparent  adjust-
                       ment to the isolation rou ine usually continues frm one to three
                       veeks.  As it continues,, the prisoner becomes increasingly
                       dejected and dependent. He  gradua2lly  gives  up  all  spmtaneous
                       activity within his cell and loses &3.1 care about his pers
                       appearance and actions.  Finally., be site and stams vith a
                       vacant expression,, perhaps endlessly tvisting a bu+.tcm on his
                       coat. He allows himself to  become  dirty  and  disheveled.  Whez
 2                      food is presented to bin., he no longer bothers v:Lth the niceties
                       of eating but be eats it all.  He my mix it into a m2gh and
                       stuff it into his mouth like an aniwal.  Be goes through the
                       notions of his prism routine autcoatieally as if  he  vere  in  a
                       daze.  The slop jar is no longer offensive to bin.  At this
       9                point.. the prisoner seem to lose many restraints of ordinary
                       bebaylor.  He may soil blawaf., he veeps., matters and prays
                       aloud to himself. lb fo3.lovs the orders of the  guard  vith  the
                                                     23.

                                          C
                              a trlined animgi.  Indeedp the gumrds B&Y that
                    docility Of
                                 reftced to ftt  I sw.  it is estimted tbst in
                    prisoners mv
                    the average case t takes fr.= four to six weeks of rig:Ldp total
                    2isolation to produce this ilhencOen0n,
                                                  es isolation in Prison 'BP of
                       The man who first experienc
                    course, experiencing far more than simple isolation.  He usua,4
                    feels profoundly anxious.
                                            helpless., frustrated,, de2jected., and
                    entirely uncertain about his futwe-  His first reaction to the
                                                     of bewilderment and som
                    isolation procedure is indeed one
                    numbness at the calamity which has befallen him.  This is
                    followed by a period of interest and apprehension about every
                    detail of the prison regimen.. accompanied by ho2pe that he can
                    explain everything an soon as he gets a chmce, or an expects-
                    tion that he will be released vhen the proper authorities bear
                    about his plight.  Sur-h hopes last but a fev days, but they keep
                    him alert and interested during that time.
                        As hope disappears, a reaction of anyious waiting super-
      2              venes.  In this period, the profound boredcm and cceplete
                    loneliness of his situation gradually overwhelm the prisoner.
                    There is nothing for him to do except rundmte.  Because he has
                    so much to worry about, his runinationsam seldca pleasmt.
                    Frequently, they take the form of going over and over all the
                   9 possible causes for his arrest.  Rio nood becmes one of
                                                 22

                      dejectim.  His sleep is disturbed by ni&tmares-  He ultimtely
                      X*Aclms & stage of depression in vhich he ceases to care &boat
                      his personal appearance and behavior and pays little attention to
                      his              in this stage the Prisoner my have :LUusory
                      experiences.  A2 distant sovnd in the corridor souads like someone
                      c&Uing his nam.  The rattle of a footstep my be interpreted
                      &a a key in the lock opening the cell.  God my seer to ffpeak tO
                      his in his prayers.  He may see his v:Lfe standing beside him.  Big
                      need for human cc=anionship and his desire to talk to anyone
        2              about anything becomes a goaving appetite like the b=ger a a
                      starving mwn.
                      Other Aspects of the Isolation Regimen
                          Not all of the reaction to this imprisoment experience can
                      be attributed to isolation alone.  Other potent forces are acting
                      upon the nevly iMr:Lsoned mwn.2  The pr:Lsmer Is anxiety about
                      hi,m elf is compowded by vorry about vbat my bappm to his
                      fr:LendA and asomiates., and., in the case of those vbo possess
                      information vbich they vish to bidel, apprehension about bov wich
                      the Xe knovs or vin ftA out.  Ev   in the absence Of iSO1&tiCn
                      profound and uncontrolled anxiety is disorgilnizing.  Uncertainty
                      adds to his anxiety.  ![be nevly arrested pr:Lsoner does not know
                      hm long be vM be confined., bw be vM be pmisbed., or with
                      vbat he vi3.1 be cbarged.  He'does know that 2his pmisbmut =7
                                                   23

               uiw4u@=   zvW  uT  Lmg=m  ST  9ni@waAB  W*PW;D  IPTRA   4'6   TOAOT
                   !@,w 11,4wm gv@MUT-4wo 04-minDo Jo;  VTOO  O"  -W  VR  an  MnTo
                    ST qoTqjL r"oT i @v Ttoo sq,4 jo              M   Suiuivl@ub-M
                  P I-WI. ST &=S=d ;O Odft A&TVO;P VW *TftTg ZOR40W
                     uTw4im9 ol..ftTTTqe 9.w;,4oTA M  zTvftT  q*M  p  q-4oq  Iguou
                  -;.WTV  p  soot  v  V=  somnotogwo  Jo  gwnmoto  go2mvozd  dooto
                     Jo  foot  VOWTWO  "4"To  "  ;;o  II"  OR   ou   wmr   vmovwip
                    9,; zmmrtad
                  %V  zomgtzd  M  =XvAo  2=a  gpmmg   M   Vm   .Isoiuwbm!@m   &*TO.
                   OvnWzd  PK  u;  w;4TOOd'PT9Tz  v  9u@-inu@m.;O  ftTBOGDQU  *R'4
               7M TEOD gq;.  UT  '4qftT  '4unguO*  G%Z  *40*Tg  "=b*P  Z*="Ttd 2 00
                ftn,cr"aid Fm a%STt@,oj ftT,4va= a= asM jo 6&-;VOMO "M
                 p  anz  -emipsead  ftTAWi  jo  9AU   aATV*;p   tTqp;   Vm   weftp
                      Tvwl;4TPP9 NM 094VP  UT  'OOT;JO  &q'4  "OVO;P  PGZTIIOP  go
                  O=Vwd  "  Ohoue  4ou  0=  euote  maq-4.  ;I   -*-tq=*ToWT   owoq
                SW ROTRA =T'4vft'4TO 'D MJJ  Odg0og  JO  PMOM  ands  4"9  n  "=419
                -0="2uT  zT*q!@  "  XM  004  ZO"*  mq'4  9*m  "   VmT*T;Ps   trr§u=
                     0= 'CL-OPM PM LWTw4JOO= "OOTI-VTOOT P 9-4@J;O NM
                                                       *OuBTt'ai  VW  aws   zoq4mj
                  Piel oaxmqqSTtt  7m  geouoqzn,4oTp  deaTS.  ***=Txadn  *ToqA  OM
                p %oodev *Tquzw-,qun Vow sq,@ o-; ftuTv;jomm  -4vq-4  An  oxametad
                       Luix  ,4===mTidmT  Vmmz;ad  zo  7%vap  oo4   &   DwRlim   oq

                        body temperature, is enervating and fatigue PrOd=JLng-  Sustained
                        cold is uncomfortable and poorly tolerated*
                             Still anotlmr pressure is to reduce the food ration to the
                        point to which the prismer  experiences  constant  hwwr-
                         I)epriv2ation of food produces lassitude., loss of general interest
                         and some breakdovu of co='age-  ighere is usually a lose of veigbt..
                         often associated with weakness and asthenia.  Scue individuals
                         beccm profo=41y depressed vbm deprived of food-  loth in
                         prison camps and in hmm e2xperiments., it has been observed that
                         chronically hm3,grY people can be induced to break dovn their
                         culture-bound inhibitions and carry out antisocial acts in order
                         to relieve their hunger.
                              -the effects of isolation., -qn3dety., fatigue.. lack Of sleep2.,
                         =comfortable temperatures, and chronic h=g= produce d:Lstlarb-
                          a=es of smav attitudes., and behavior in nearly all prisoners-
                          'The living orpnim cannot entirely withstand S=b ass,-Iml-tL'-
                               -fhe ccmumisto do not look Vm these  assaults  as
                                  It                                           --y do in
                          ntorture . Umloubtedly, they use the methods which  tb
                          order to confo=, in a typical legalistic numerp to CO=MiBt
                          tb,emy which demnds that "no force o2r torture be wed in
                          extracting infox-MtioU      priamers."  But these methods do
                                     tortwe #ad pbysical coercion and should never be
                                                                                   bances
                           considered otherwise.  All of thm lead to serious distor
                                6                       25

                       of mm7 bodily processes and to demobi3.ization of the
                       personality.
                       The laterrogiltor
                            The XYD officer vbo has charge of a case during the period
                       of suspicion., surv illance and arrest is now supplanted by
                       Pt"   r officer vho is charged with the inter2rogation of the
                       prison   and the preparation of the deposition.  Withi" the
                       XYD,, assigaments to interrogiltion@. am not highly regarded.
                       Such vork is not looked upon as glamorous or exciting.  Very
                       often it involves assignment to owU7ing and relatively du22
                       regions of2 the Soviet Udon, and usually it is bard and thankless.
                       2he interrogation of prisoners is a tiring and an emotionally
                       trying procedure.  It can be assumed that a majority of those
                       involved in the investigation and interrogation of =important
                       prisoners are am of average ability vith no great entjr=igm
                       2for their job.  Noveyer., the XVD does also possess higt4
                       Wd'Ied,, vell-educated.. extremely             , experienced and
                       able interrogators vho are devoted to their profession and pro
                       of their abi3.ities.  The interrogator assigma to an inpor+.azt
                  1     prisoner can be expected to be a man of such high mliber,
                            Some of those vbo go into political police activity receive
                       only a sort of "on-the-job" training unde  the guidance of more
                       senior and experienced mn; but a fair proportion of these police
                                                    26

                      officers are especially trained at an KVD school nea Mosem.
                      This school has been in existence for at least 15 Years-  It
                      gives a course of two years duration.  Tminees are a3.loved
                      to observe a deamstr-ation interrogation but do not actu&U7
                      conduct interrogations them elves.  No formal training in
                      psycboloa., psychiatry.. pharmacology or physiology is included
                      in the curricu3.uuL.  There am no representatives of any of these
                      sciences on the faculty and, as far as can be ascertained.,   re
                      never have been.  Tminees do receive information from experi-
                      enced police officers on bow to prepare a dossier.2, bow to
                      "size-up" a man., and bow to estimate vbat sort of methods to
                      use in "breaking' him; but the instructors drav entirely upon
                      police experience.  They have a contempt for theoretical
                      psychiatry and psychology.
                      Interrogation
                           When the prisoner has been arrested and incarcerated in his
                      cel2l the officer in charge of his case submits to his superiors
                      a plan for the interrogation of the prisoner.  This plan is
                      dra,wn up on the basis of what is already known about the
                      prisoner.  It describes the methods to be used upon bin, the
                      attitudes to be takelm toverd him,, the type of information which it
                      is8 ex                                    type
                           ,Pected that be will reveal., and the    of crimes which he
                      is believed to have committed and the assumed motivation for them.
                                                   27
                        77

                         The purpooe of this plan appears to be Pri=!Lrily that Of
                         the interrogator approach the prisoner with a definite coneeption
                         of vhat he vants to do, and how be is going to proceed in doing
                         it.
                            Soviet lav specifies that, if a moln is detained  on  suspicion,
                         the first protocol of his interrogati2on must be given to the  state
                         prosecutor within ten days so that an arrest varrant my be issued,
                         or the man may be released.  In general, interrogators are con-
                         strained to comply with this regulation., and they try to produce
                         enough evidence to obtain an arrest within ten days.  Because
                         they 'have little except suspicion to guide their questioning,
 2                        they am necessarily vague in describing the  prisoner's  crimes  to
                         him.  They =at be cautious lest the prisoner get wind of wbat they
                         want him to say and refuse to say it.  It is probably this more
                         than any calculated cunning vbich causes them to mk  to the
                         prisoner such enigogltic statements as-."It is not up to me to  teU
             2            you vbat your crimes am; it is up to you to tell me" -- statements
                         vbich lead the perplexed prisoner to rack his brain for an auaver.
                         The prosecutor is not hard to satisfy., and the interrogator nearly
                         alvays obtains enough evidence to make an "arrest".  If not, he
                         can apply for an extension of the detention period.  The lav
 4                        provides no real protection for the prisoner.  It has been
                         estimated that more than 994 of those vho are seized am ultimately
                         convicted and pmished.
                                                       28

                        Interrogations, once beg    are continued until. the cas-- in
                    ccW3.et,al tut in some eiremstanees they am inteutiOM127 d&167&d.
                    It appears that this delay is invosed -§%P-n tb,-- prisoner is defiant.,
 2                   vben he is thovght to be wit  ld4ng informtion,, vhen the XVD is
                    seeking a confession to crims other tb= those,for vhich it has
                    evidmee,, and-espeei&14       it vants to use the prisoner for a
                    public trial or to obtain a pxvpagands confession from him.  In
                    such cases., the interrogation begins vhm the officer in charge
                    feels tbut the prisoner is ripe for it.  This is usu&12Y w   he
                    observe* that the prisoner has become docile and compliant and
                    shows evidenne of de  rioration in his mood and personal appearance.
                         Interrogations are &Iwst uniformly carried out at ni2ght -  It
                    in said that this practice of nigl2t interrogation originated not
                    from any preconceived idea of its effectiveness., but because the
                    early Chokisto vem so o.erburdened with po3.ice duties during the
                    day that they eaqld find time for interrogations only at night.
                    For am reason or another,,2 it has become standard procedure.,
                    possibly because the physical and psychological effect of night
                    interrogiltiew prodv&" added pressure upon the prisoner.  Be is
                    deprived of sleep and placed in a state of added uncertainty by
                    never knowing vbea he will be avakened and questioned.
                         Typically, he vi3.1 be avakezed ou4&knly by the guard shortly
                    after he has dropped off to sleep.  Vithout explanation be is
                                                 29

                    taken frtu his eel-I and down several corridors to a =all and
                    barren interrogation roca equipped with a desk and chair for the
                    interrogator and a stool for the prisoner.  The lighting is
                    arranged so that the prisoner can be placed in a bright light
                    while the interrogator site in relative darkness.  Sometimes a2
                    stenographer is present in one corner of the rocm to take notes.
                    More Often the interrogator makes his own notes., writing as the
                    prisoner speaks.  Usually only one interrogator is present but
                    occasionally other officers are introduced.  Somietines interro-
                    gators alternate, for psychological reasons, one being "friendlyw
2                    and the other "hostile".  If his work is successful, the
                    original interrogator may carry the case through to a conclusion,
                    but if he does not achieve the desired goal, he may be replaced.
                        The atmosphere of the interrogation rocm generally has some
                    degree Of forinlity about it.  The interrogator any be dressed
                    in full mifors.  If he wishes2 to in
                                                       .press the prisoner, he may
                    take out a pistol, cock it, and lay it on the desk before his;
                    but this psychological gambit does not seen to be a required part
                    of the protocol.
                       The interrogator adjusts his attitude toward the prisoner
                    according to his estimate of the kind of man he is facing.  If the
                    dossier In5dicates that the prisoner is a timid and fearful mn,
                    the interrogator nay adopt a fierce and threatening demeanor.  If
                                               30

                 the pris   r is thought to be proucl and sensitive,, the
                 interrogator pay be insulting and degrading.  If the prisoner has
                 been a man of prestige and importance in private life,, the
                 interrogator my ea32 his by his first nme., treat his as an
                 inferior and remind hiin that he has lost all rank  and  privilege.
                 If it is knovn that the prisoner has been unfaithful  to  his  wife
                 or has committed some crime such as embezzlement.,  the  interrogator
                 may bl=k-,,il him by threatening exposure or punisbment unless he
                 cooperates.  All these and many other tricks may be employed.
                 They are not based upon a scientific theory of 'ni-in behavior;
                 they are tricks of the trade., s2o to speak, developed out  of  police
                 experience and applied on a 'rule of  thumb",  comon  sense  basis.
                      Almot invariably the interrogator  takes  the  attitude  that
                 the prisoner is guilty and acts as though all of  his  crimes  are
                 knovn. Almost invariably he points out to  the  prisoner  that  he
                'is completely helpless., and that there is no hope for  him  unl2ess
                 be cooperates fully and  confesses  his  crimes  completely.  Almot
                 never does the interrogator state specifically  vbat  the  prisoner's
                 cri a actu&Uy axe - This is left up to  the  prisoner  vho  is  told,
                 In effect,, that he knova the extent of his own criuesj, and  need
                 only to make a complete statement of them.  Almst invariably the
  4               interrogator does not accept the early statements  of  the  prisoner.
                 No matter vbat crimes he confesses., the interrogator  forces  the
                                               31

                prisoner to repeat his statements again and epinl, and to elaborate
                 on thm endlessly.  Almost always he uses any discrepancies as
                 indications of lying and questions the prisoner at length about
                 thm.
                      The first interrogation sessions am  nearly  always  concerned
                 with a complete review of the entire life experience of the
                 prisoner.  The2 interrogator wishes to know about the prisoner's
                 background., his class origin, his parents., brothers and sisters,
                 his friends and associates and everything that he has done
                 throughout his life.  If the case is of any importance, no   detail
                  is overlooked., and every period of the prisoner's life must be
                  accounted for.
                       This reviev of the2 prisoner's life may occupy several
                  interrogation sessions.  It has several purposes.  Its first
                  purpo
                       se is to complete the prisoner's dossier.     gives +-he
                  interrogator a tboroug           f the type of man he  is  dealing
                                        tL picture o
                  with and further guides his to the man's weaknesses which  can  2be
                  exploited.  Furthermore., requiring a man to account for every
                   detail of his life produces such a volminous and  involved  story
                   that the prisoner can scarcely avoid being trapped into i=onsist-
                   encies if he is concealing anything.  The information obtained
                   frca the life history can also be compared with that  already  in
                   the polic1e files., vhich is usually extensive.  From the police
                                                32
                                           C

                point of view., it is also important to know the asomistes of the
                prisoner because this way reveal his  'accomplices',  who  then
                beccm suspects and  cm  be  interrogated.  Most  Important,  it
                reveals many "cri-inal" features of the prisoner such as reaction-
                ar7 class origin., membership in reactionary 2organizations and
                association with enemies of the state which  are  by  Communist
                definition "crimes" no matter how long ago  they  were  committed.
                     The prisoner, taken from his cell after a long period of
                isolation, anxiety and despair, usually looks  upon  the  first
                interrogation as a welcome break. The  mere  opportunity  to  talk
                to someone is intensely2 gratifying.  Many prisoners have reported
                that after long periods of isolation  they  eagerly  anticipate
                interrogation sessions and try to prolong them simply for the
                companionamp which they afford.  Not infrequently, the prisoner
                else) r#beards interrogation as an opportunity to justify  himself
                and feels false assurance that he can explain everything if given
               2 a chance.
                     Usually be is much taken aback by the fact  that  his  crimes
                are not specified, and that his guilt is assumed.  Be is further
                distressed when his protestations of innocence are greeted as lies,
                But the opportunity to talk about his life experiences is generally
                looked upon, especially by a person.from Western society,,  as  an
                opportunity to justify his behavior.  Many5 men willingly divulge
                                              33

                    all they can remember about themselves because they feel quite avure
                    that they have done nothing vhich may be rega.L    as crilwivial.
                    They aro-- mavam that., from the point of view of Comm=ist theory
                    and of the MVD2 such of their past behavior undoubtedly vill be
                    const2rued as "criminal".  If the interrogator offers then the
                    opportmnity to ha-we paper and pencil in their cells and to  vrite
                    out their biographies,, they seize upon this avidly as a means  of
                    relieving the boredom of the tedious, lonely routine-to vhieh they
                    axe exposed.
                    Pressures Applied by the Interrogator
                         As the interrog2ation proceeds, the interrogator  changes  his
                    behavior according to his previous plan and the development of
                    the case.  If the prisoner is cooperating and talkinx freely, the
                    interrogator continues to show a relatively friendly attitude.
                    But sooner or later he invariably expresses  dissatisfaction  with
                    t]2e information vhich the prisoner has given, no matter hov
                2    complete it may be.  le Amanda nev details., and shows an
                    especially great interest in the accomplices of the  prisoner  and
                    the "organization" to vhich be in supposed to have been attached.
                    When the prisoner protests that be has told all., and denies any
                    other crimes or accomplices,, the interrogator becomes hostile and
                    begins to apply pressure.
          6                                        34

                      Some of the pressures which can be applied simply by altering
                  the routine within the cell have been described.  The interrogator
                  has many others at his ccmnand. Continuous and  repetitive
                  interrogation is an effective and very common form of pressure.
                  Another which in widely used is that of requiring the prisoner to
                  stand through2out the interrogation session or to maintain some
                  other physical position which becomes painful. This,  like  other
                  features of the MVD procedure, is a foru of physical torture,  in
                  spite of the fact that the prisoners and MVD officers &like do
                  not ordinarily perceive it as such. Any fixed position  which  is
                  maintained over a long period of time ultimatel2y produces
                  excruciating pain.  Certain positions, of which the standing
                  position in one, also produce impairment of the circulation.
                      Many men can withstand the pain of long standing,  but
                  sooner or later all men succ=b to the circulatory  failure it
                  produces.  After 18 to 24 hours of continuous standing, there  is
                  an acamulition 2of fluid in the tissues of the  legs.  This
                  dependent 'edema" is produced by the extravasation of fluid  from
                  the blood vessels. The ankles and feet of the  prisoner  swll  to
                  twice their normal circvnference.  The ed   my rise up the legs
                  as high as the middle of the thighs - The skin beccmes tense  and
                  intensely painful. Lar9ge blisters develop which break  and  exude
                  watery serm.  The accuwilation of the body fluid in the legs
                                               35

                  produces an impaizmn  of the circulation.  The heart rate
                  increases and fainting may occur. Eventually there  is  a  renal
                  shutdown, and urine production ceases. Urea  and  other  metabolites
                  accmwAAte in the blood.  The prisoner becomes thirsty.. and my
                  drink a good deal of water., which is not excreted,Ibut &Ms  to  the
 2                 edema of his legs. Mm have been  known  to  remain'standing  for
                  periods as long an several days.  Ultimately they usually develop
                  a delirious state., characterized by disorientation, fear.,
                  delusions, and visual hallucinations.  This psychosis is produced
                  by a combination of circulatory impairment, lack of sleep,,  and
                  urestia -
                 2     Periods of long standing are usually interrupted  from  time  to
                  time by interrogation periods during which the interrogator
                  demands and threatens,, while pointing out to the prisoner that it
                  would be easy for his to end his misery =rely by cooperating.
                      The-XVD hardly ever uses manacles or chains, and rarely
                  resorts to physical beati2ngs.  The actual physical beating is., of
                  course,, contrary to MVD regulations. The ostensible reason  for
                  these regulations is that they are contrary to Ccmnunist theory.
                  The practical reason for then is the fact that the XYD looks upon
                  direct pbysical brutality as an ineffective method of obtaining  the
                  compliance of the prisoner.  Its o4pinion in this regard is shared
                  by police in other parts of the world. In general,, direct  physical
                                              36

                  brutality creates only resentment, hostility and further defianee.
                       It is a general policy that the interrogator must obtain the
                  written permission of his superiors before using extreme
                  coercive measures of azy sort upon prisoners.  In actual practice
                  such permission is sought only if the officer in charge of a case
                  feels that there is a need for a dir2ect brut'al assault.  The XVD
                  recognizes that some men who are  intensely afraid of physical
                  assault my break down if beaten once or twice, and it does use
                  this procedure deliberately, though uncommonly.  Generally
                  spesikiin , vhe@ an interrogator strikes a prisoner in anger he does
                  so "unofficially".  The act is usually an ex2pression of his
                  exasperation and evidence that he, himmlf., is under emotional
                  strain
                      It can be taken for granted that some period of intense
                  pressure and coercion will be applied to every prisoner., no
                  mui,@er how ewperative he tries to be at first.  This period of
                  pressur,e will be accompanied by expressions of di9spleasure and
                  hostility from the interrogator, and sometimes from the guards
                  also.
                  The"Priendly Approach"
                      The interrogator will continue this pressure until he feels
                  that the prisoner is nearly at the end of his rope.  At this point
                  he introduces a psychological gambit which is probably the most
                                              3T

                   successful of any of the tricks at his eamema.  He evadenly
                   ch=&s his  demeanor.  The  prisoner,  returned  once  Win  to  an
                   interrogation session that he expects will be a repetition of
                   torture and vilification, suddenly finds that  the  entire  scene
                   has changed. The interrogation  room  is  brightly  lighted.  The
                   in2terrogator is seated behind his desk, relaxed and smiling.
                   Tea and cigarettes are waiting on the table.  He  is  ushered  to
                   a comfortable chair. The gusrd is sent  away  and  sometimes  the
                   secretary also. The interrogator  remarks  about  his  appearance.
                   He is sympathetic about the discomfort which he has been
                   suffering. He is sorry that the prisoner has  had  such  a  diffi-
                   cult time.  The interrogator himself would not have wished to
                   do this to the prisoner -- it is only that the prison regula-
                   tions require this treatment, because of the prisoner's ovu
                   stubbornness.  "But let us relax and be friends.  Let us not
                   talk any more about crimes. Tell me about  your  fauily"  --  aaa
          2         so on. The usual line is to the effect that, "After all., :E  aiL
                   a reasonable man. I want to get this business  over  as  -ucb  as
                   you do . This in as tirescm to me as it  is  to  you.  We  already
                   know about your crimes; it is a sere formality for you  'to  write
                   out your confession.  Why don't we get it over with so that
                   everything 8can be settled and you can be released?"
                                                 38

                     prisoners find this sudden friendship and release Of P2esutne
                  almost irresistible. Nearly all of then avidly seize the oppor-
                  tvnity to talk about themselves and their feelings, and then go on
                  to talk about their families.  Most of then proceed from this
                  almost automatically to giving the information v2hich the interro-
                  gator seeks.  Even if they do not provide everything the interro-
                  @Ltor vants at this time., be my continue his friendly demeanor
                  and the relaxation of pressure for several more sessions before
                  remmina the old regimen of torture.  But if the prisoner does
                  reveal significant information and cooperates fully, the revards
                  am prompt and gratifying.  The interrogator smi2les and congratu-
                  lat,es him. Cigarettes am forthcoming. There is a large meal,
                  often excellently prepared and served; and after this the
                  prisoner returns to his cell and sleeps as long as be likes, in
                  emy pnoition that he chooses.
                  The Courw of the interrogation
                      Such friendly and reverding beha2vior will continue for
                  several days -- usually as long an the interrogator feels that a
                  sigaificant mount of now information is being produced.  At this
                  point the prisoner my conclude that his ordeal is over; but
                  invariably he is disappointed.  For as soon as the interrogator
                  decides that no new information is being yielded, the regimen of
                  constant pressure and h8ostile interrogation is resumed.  Again it
                                               39

                                 MEMO
                                                   -21000
                                                    IAL
                   is carried to the point at which the prisoner is near breakdown.
                   Again it is relaxed, and again the prisoner is rewarded if he
                   cooperate*.  Izk this ma=er, proceeding with regular steps,
                   alternating p2uniabsent with revard, the prisoner is constantly
                   pressed to revise and rewrite the protocol until it contains &3.1
                   the statements which the :LnterrogiLtor desims., and is in a finit'
                   form which -pets with his approval.  When it has at last been
                   agreed upon and signed, the pressure is relaxed "for gooe, but
                  2 the prisoner continues to live in his cell and continues under
                   the threat of renewed pressure until such time &a he has been
                   taken before a court, has confessed, and has been sentenced.
                        Throughout the entire interrogation period, the prisoner is
                   under so= form of medical surveillance.  Prison physicians are
                   fe-iliar with &3.1 the effec2ts produced by XVD procedures, and
                   evidently they are skilled at judging just hov far the various
                   procedures can be carried without killing or permanently
                   dana ing the prisoner. Prisoners who bave-been beaten  have  their
                   wo da carefully dressed. Those who are forced to  stand  for  long
                   periods of time are examined periodically during the procedure.
  4                 Scmetimes the physician intervenes to call a halt if be feels  the
                   prisoner is in danger. The unintended death of a  prisoner  during
                   the interrogation procedure is regarded as a serious error on  the
                   pp.rt of the prison officials.
                                                4,D

                   The laterrop t*, is poft -,of Viev and (YbiecttYeW
                      1+. bas been mid that the interrogator avproaehes the
                   prisoner vitbl the wwaption that he- is gtlilty.  It In importamt-
                   that ve deflxo,.--tbis outement precisely.2  It does not seen that
                   the interrogator is not avere of the "trw facts" of the sitvAL-
                   tion but that he interprets    in the ligilt of Ccm=ist
                   ideology. The NO officer in a Commist.  He bas selected this
                   prisoner from one of the groups of suspects described ear3.ier.
                   The mm vas arrested because the MD, vhich represents the
                   ccmstmist State., regarded bin as a menace to the Party or its
                            An7out vho is a menace to the Party is,, by definition
                   progrm.
                   guilty of threatening the security of the Ccmnist State. Ergo.,
                   from the commist p2oftt Of VievL, the ma is 'guilty' . In other-
                   vlords, the XO Us decided that this man =at be dealt vitk ij&
                   acme manner,, 'for the good of the $Ute." Once the =a bas  bee&
                   arrested t]Lis poixlt is ac longer open to qoestton.  This is the
                   true than& oooter:Lc me-inx of Ow frequatly repeated CcomsoList
                   statement that 01* a-ecommist oute,, innocent people  am  never
                                                              Of "AL*211+n
                              If am accepts their definition            49"
                   minamenoo"., ULD Is indeed a fact
 9                      liowe"r., the interrogator does not know Just vbat specific
                   scrims' the ma,day bave comitte,&. In fact., it is qvlte  clear
                   ,,tbat most of the-peopu arrested by the NY* have not re&W

                       ccmitted any specific serious crimes at all. But  the  police  dO'
                       know that the prisoner has comitted some acts vhich a-re contailry
                       to the broad Soviet lave against political crimes, as vell as
                       minor "actual' crimes.  Purtheruore, experience has taught tbm
                       that if they put enough pressure upon the prisoner, soc-ner or2
                       later they vil-I get his to confess to acts vtLicbL can be inter-
                       preted as a "mjor crime".  Once this confession has been obtained,,
                       the XVD can demand from the court a punisbment equivalent to tbilt
                       vhich it intended that the prisoner should receive when it
                       arrested his.
                           Much of th2e activity of the interrogator can  be  looked  upon
                       as a process of persuasion. The primary work  of  an  interrogator
                       is to convince the prisoners that vbat they did vas a crime.
                       Having gotten evidence from his informers and from  the  prisoner,
                       it is up to the interrogator to persuade the prisoner that certain
                       acticias i2@tich he has carried out constitute a crime.  The
                       prisoner is usually prepared to admit that the acts bave been
                       carried out.  Often as not, he revealed then freely because he did
                       not consider then to be cri-in I. It is  up  to  the  interrogator
                       to make the prisoner see,that these acts do constitute  a  serious
                       5crime., and acknowledge this by sisming a deposition and -wki    a
                       confession in court if necessary.  The Commmist legal system
                       requires that this be done before a case can be settled.
                                                     42

                        The fact that the interro  tor in a dedicated Cc=wnist makes
                   his task of peremsion senevbat easier.  The interrogator approaches
                   the prisoner vith the knowledge that the v&,k-a is actually a criminal
                   by Camanint definition; and he has  a  large  body  of  convenient
                   Ccmmmist definitions a2nd rationalizations  to  help  his  in  con-
                       ing his victim of this.  For exmple,, according to Cc=2,nist
                   theory, sets are judged by their "objective effects" rather than
                      the motives of those who comitted them.  Thus, if a prisoner,,
                           an honest mistake, has dom@pd a piece of mehinery
                     longing to the State, he is a 2"wrecker".  Objectively., he has
                   wrecked an izport-ant piece of property belonging  to  the  State.
                   The fact that he did this with innocent motives is not a considera-
                   tion.  Thus a "mistake"., and "accident" and a "crime" all become
                   the same thing.
                        Likewise,  according to Commmint theory,,  a  mn's  acts  and
             2      thoughts are judged "consequentially'. Thue,  if  a  p-risoner  is
                            have said that the MVD vas too poverful, the fact that
                          said this my make  his  a  "traitor"  and  "saboteur".  The
                   Camunist reasoning is that a man vho says  that  the  XYD  is  too
                   po,werfu3.., believes that it in too powerful and 5vill  ultimately
                   act upon this belief.  This ultimate &et viU constitute sabotage
                   and treason; therefore,, the =a is a saboteur and a traitor.
                   Similarly, a =La vbo has friendly association vith foreign
                                                 43

                   national  Ngwt have    friendly feeling toward       foreign
                   goyerments am Capitalist and ImPerig"st  ; oL mn vbo is friendl7
                   to foreia natiameJA is giving help to the agents  of  capitalist
                   imperi&lim; tboreforep2 the man is a aN vbether he  re&3.ims  it
                   or not
                      Such peculiar twists of  Commmist  logic  am  difficult  for
                   Western prisoners to accept at first. Usually they  object
                   strenuously to these definitions of "treason", "wreckine )  and
                   -sabotap-; but ultimtely., under constant pressure 2and Per8m-
                   sion., a prisoner usually agrees to some statement to the effect
                   that., "By ccmnmist laws I au a 83?Y. a  Thereafter, there follova
                   further arg=ent and persuasion to the effect that  a  per*=  is
                   judged by the lavs of the country in vtlich the crimes axe
                   comitted.  Ultimately the2 TmLlifying pbram is mitted.,   and
                   the final deposition contains the simple statement, "I an a spy.'
                       )ft=;, %.mD officers impress the prisoner by the sincerity of
                   their dedication to Comomim and  its  ostensible  ide&3.9.  The
                   interrosltor often displxyg a patient symp2athy vhich becoms
                       wnt to the prisoner.  His attitude tbat., "This is scm
                   &PW
                   ve =at go throvgh with and neither you nor I cm stop 'until you
                   have cooperated and sigwd a proper confessim",, is to some
                   extent a genuine attitude. The XYD system allows  of  no  other
                   solu9tion from the ixterrogator's point of view.  It is in fact
                                                44

                   true that the interrogations vill have to go on 'until a proper
                   deposition has been signed.  The prisoner often emes to recognize
                   this sincerity.  Many see that indeed the interrogator must follow
                   the systes, and there is nothing vblich he can do about it.  Thuso
                   the prisoner,, in his need for companionship, may displace his
   2                hostility from the interrogator to the  "system".  Many  interro-
                   gators genuinely plead with the prisoner to learn to see the trath.,
                   to think correctly,, and to cooperate.
                   The Reaction of the Prisoner to the Interrogation
                        The vay in which a prisoner reacts to the whole  process  of
                   Interrogation is to a gre2at extent dependent upon the uwlnner  of
                   wiwln he is, his pre-existing attitudes and beliefo@ and the
                   circumstances surrounding his arrest and impriso=ent.  All
                   prisoners have this in c------- They have been isolated and have
                   been under unremitting pressure in an atmosphere of hostility and
                   uncertainty. They all find theumlves  in  a  dile@  at  the  time
                   that the interrogation begins.  The regimen of pressure and
                   isolation has created an overall discomfort vhich is vel.1 nigh
                   intolerable. The prisoner  invariably  feels  that  somethin  =at
                   be done to find a way out.  Death is denied his.  Mtimtely., he
                   finds himself faced vith the choice of continuing 1interodnably
                   under the intolerable pressures of his captors or  accepting  the
                   way out, vhich the interrogiltor.offers.  The vay out in a
                                                45

                 raticneL3'zatica.  It allows the prisoner to meet the de=W  of
                 his interrogator by degirees,, while at the ea= time retaining
                 within himself some abred of belief that  by  his  own  standards  he
                 bus not capitulated. The rationalization  may  be  --  and  very  often
                 is -- so patently absurd and untru2e that the  victim.,  in  his  "right
                 mincl",, would be utterly incapable of accepting it.  But be is not
                 in his right mind. ELs capacity  to  distinguish  true  from  false..
                 or good from bad, has been deliberately undemined.  With
                 exceptions prisoners accept this way  out.,  provided  the  pressures
                 are prolonged and intense and the interrogat2or can effectively
                 adjust his persuasiveness.
                      Various categories of prisoners  respond  to  different  types  of
                 persuasion.  Persons who have been lifelong members of the Ccowmist
                 party are familiar with  the  Comunist  concept  of  "crim"  and  the
                 functions of the XVD.  Furthermore,, they have all been trained in
           2      ""e         o-l' self-criticism, confession,, punisbment and  rebabili-
                 tation which has been put  of  Ccowxaist  procedure  since  before  the
                 revolution.  Many Ccmnmists can rationalize a belief that they
                 are actually criminals as specified by the XVD and ecue to see
                 their puniaboent as necessary for the good of the State mA the
                 Party. TD the +.rue  Party  mmber,  such  mlrtyrdm  carries  with  it
                    air of tri=Th.
                                                46

                        Son-Cominist  prisoners of idealistic beliefs or socialist
                   sympathies appezently       ready targets for the logic of the
                   interrogator.  Such persons am uzmlly compelled to agree that
                   the ostensible and idealistic motives of the  Communist  Party  am
                   "good", and that those who oppose these ideals are 2"bad".  The
                   rationalization in this case takes the form of getting the
                   prisoner to say that the Commmist Party has the        value
                   system that he does; something which the prisoner agrees is  "bad7
                   by his own definition.  From this point the prisoner proceeds
                   through the usml steps to the ultimate sigaing of the deposition.
                     2   Persons vho carry with tlum strong feelings of guilt
                   associated with higb4 organized systems of moral values likewise
                   become ready targets for the persuasion of the interrogator.  Very
                   few people am entirely free of guilt feelings.. but., inappropriate
                   as it seems., such feelings often are found in the highest  degree
                   in those2 vhose objectives and behavior are  beyond  reproach.  For
                   example,, many strongly religious people have a profound sense  of
                   sin.  They feel guilty of shortcomin s of their ovn which are
                   micli smaller than those found in most of their fellow  men.  They
                   constantly see tbesmlves as transgressing their own moral code
                   and in 1the need of forgiveness for doing so.  Skilled interro-
                   giltore a&  use of this.
                                                47

                          Individmls with so-called sociopathic or psychopabkde
                     personalities vho have few  adral  scruples  am  vulnerable  beeseme
                     they can be bribed,, in a sense., to take the easy vay out.
                     Obviously,, ind:Lriduals actuau..v "caught with the goods"  receive
                     short shrift 2at the bauft of the MVD interrogator.
                          The maze in vbich any prisoner finds himself has so mwq
                     ramifications that it is almost impossible for him to escape from
                     it without signing a protocol  and  being  convicted.  AnytbJmg  he
                     has done my be a crime. He  has  been  adjudged  guilty  before  his
                     arrest.  He is put in a situ2ation of intolerable pressure.  It
                     in made clear to himl that his only vay out of  this  situation  is
                     to cooperate with the interrogator.  He  is  offered  a  reasonable
                     rationalization for doing so.  Sooner or later, under these
                     circumstances, the prisoner and the inte.Lz gator ajnoat inevitably
                     come to an agreement upon a depositio2n vbieh satisfies both of
                     then.
                     7he Trial
                          When the prisoner has finally reached the point of admitting
                     his crimes and be and the interrogator have agreed upon a protocol
                     satisfactor7 to both of then, he experiences  a  profound  sense  of
                     relief.  Even though his crimes may be 7serious and the punlisbmezt
                     for then severe,, he velccoes a surcease from the unrelenting
                     pressures and miseries of  the  isiterrogation  procedure.  Whatever
                                                   48
                                              C

                the future my hold for him, he has for the moment found a way out
                of an intolerable situation.
                    When a satisfactor7 deposition has been prepared  and  signed.,
                the pressures upon the prisoner are customarily  relamed.  Be  is
                allowed to sleep as long as he wishes; he may have reading and
            2    writing material in his room. Sometimes he can  join  with  other
                prisoners in periods of exercise.  His meals improve and his
                guards become friendly or even solicitous.  This  easy  treatment
                is continued until he is thoroughly rested and his health has
                been restored.  Then., in =at cases, he is taken before the court.
                The state pros2ecutor presents the court with the signed protocol
                and questions the prisoner about his  crime.  Sometimes  a  defense
                attorney is assigned; this -*,n invariably limits himelf to
                requesting leniency from the court.  The whole procedure is
                usually brief and formal. There am no  verdicts  of  "not  guilty".
                ,@fne        of the judge is solely that of presiding over t2he
                trial and passing upon the prisoner a sentence which brs J-mi&ll@v
                been agreed upon beforebana by the prosecutor and the  MVD  officer
                in charge of the case.
                     It is this aspect of the proceedings vhich is most  bev:Llder-
                ing to Western observers. It is easy to  understand  hov  prisoners
               2 can be tortured Into signing confessions of crimes which  they  did
                not comit., but it is difficult to understand why  the  prisoners
                do not renounce these confessions later at the public trials.
                                             49

                       Beginning with the PuM Trials of the 1930 Is., the M  and
                  its successors andl offspring in Rwmias the  Eastern  European
                  satellite*..-and China bave presented the world with a series of
                  pub3.ic trials at which the prisoners calmly and seemingly without
                  coercion ask  o2utrageous confessions of uabe3.ievable criues,, pxaioe
                  their captors., and ask for the most seveze punistment for tbemel"s.
                  These prisoners beve  included  important  Com=iot  offici&U.,
                  former MM officers., non-Caw=ist citizens of various extegvftes.,
                  and foreigners of the2 most diverse background&.  All of these
                  prisoners apparently were innocent; acme faced certain death; and
                  many were profoundly anti-Co=mmist.  You of the higbeet-caliber
                  and integrity like Cardinal Xindazenty amp-ml-A to have the strongest
                  possible notimtions to resist; but none of them stood up in court
                  and d2enounced the confession and his captors.  This phenomncm
                  demna  an explanation*
                       The explanation is available but it Is not simple.  It is
                  necessary to enal    the proposition in detail in order to view it
                  In its proper light.
                       Firs+.., it, is by no means true that. wa.U prisoners confess
                  freely at a public 2trial."  Only a very wiLU 3Linority of
                  prisoners of the Ccm=ist state police ever appear at a publlc
                  trial. The proportion of those tried public3.y is  e=eedinal
                  @U. The XYD will not expose a  priamer  to  a  public  trial
                                              0 50

                 unless it is convinced that he will go throvgh with his confeinion
                 an pla=2,-@d. If there it &my doubt. about this,, no public trial  it
                 held.  But ev    with this precaution the  XYD  in  not  ieallible.
                 At the Purge Trials several of the prisoner  tried  to  recant  parts
                 of their-confessions.2  When a prisoner tried to recant, the
                 prosecutor balted the exam' tion  of  that  person.  Usually,,  when
                 he returned from his cell several days later  be  was  again  docile
                 and cooperative. Scee of the  so-called  "public  trials"  have  not
                 actually been public. They have been  carried  out  in  the  presence
                 of a select audience vhile movies and recordings  are  meae  of  the
                 prisoner's words which am later transmitted to the public.
                      The mjority of prisoners do  cow  to  trial,  but  these  trials
                 axe not public. They am  held  in  camera.  The  state  police  are
                 concerned only with political crime and espionage.  Their
                 prisoners are tried before 'Mlitary Trib=als", whic2h am        not
                 public courts.  Those present am only the interrogator, the
                 state prosecutor, the prisoner,  the  judges,  a  few  stenogmpbers,
                 and perbaps a few officers of the court.  At  such  a  trial  there
                 in no opportunity for public protest, and  any  protest  which  is
                 md  can be readily expxmged frca the record.  So far an the
            6     prisoner is concerned, this so-called  trial  appears  as  nothing
                 more than the next step in his  process  of  imprisonment.  He  be*
                  m,ined entirely in the hands  of  his  interrogltors  and  guards
                                               51

                 with access tcr no one else -  When he f imlly cems before the
                 court he sees no one nev excei, the allte vroseett or, the  judv-l
                 and the court officials.  The defense attorney, if one is assigwd,
                 shove not the slightest interes in refuting any  of  the  evidence
                 in the confession or i2n establishing a plea of  "not  guilty".  Be
                 never questions the feet that the prisoner is guilty  as  charged.
                 Sometimes he asks th6 judge for lenience; but not infrequently he
                 informs the court that he is convinced the prisoner is just as big
                 a monster as the prosecution says he is and that he  cannot  bring
                 himself to ask the court for leniency. The  judge 2 likewise  shows
                 no interest in the q%L-.stion of guilt or innocence.  He limits
                 hi,m elf to maintaini  order in the court  and  passing  sentence.
                 If the prisoner bas any illusions that the prosecutor, the judge,
                 and the defense attorney are going  to  allow  him  any  opportunity
                 to dispute the facts in the ease the" are soon dispe2lled.
                      by no ml--*a  do all prisoners receive a trial of any sort.
                 Those who are stubborn or repeatedly recant their confessions
                 during the interrogation procedure will not be trusted even at
                 private trials.  UAcooperative  and  stubborn  prisoners  and  those
                 vho might make embarrassing statements are "dealt with
                 administratively." For alny7 years  the  state  police  bave  had  the
                 right to carry out  &&ainistrative  trials  for  any  prisoners  vbm
                 they do not with 'to expose  to  the.usual  trial  procedure.  ftese
                                              52

                     administrative tri-ILls ccm st of simply prese Ing the prisome.
                     to & group of three senior police officers (the "Troika") vbo POS'B
                     sentence I-- -4i&tely and have it carri-ed out forthvith. These
                     ar-inistrative trials take p2lace within the detention prison.
                     Sometims the prisoner is not even present at them; sentence is
                     passed by the Troika merely upon the basis of the signed protocol.
                         Sowtime the alleged records of these trials have bee =Ai,-.
                     public., but generally the fact that such & trial had taken place
                     is never rev\--&led.  For every 2Soviet citizen vbo has appeared at
                     a public trial there have been thousands vho have been tried only
                     at private trials by military tribunals or have been dealt with
                     administratively by the police themselves.  Thus,, a great number
                     of high Ccovanist officials, captured German officers,, and
                     sialilar prisoners vho fell into the bands of the Russian secret
2                     police vere not tried at &11.  So far as the public vas concerned.,
                     they merely disappeared.
                          It is said that since the death of Beria and the dissolution
                     of the KM,, the right of administrative trial has been withdrevn
                     from the NYD.  The history of past attempts to reform the secret
                     police suggest that it will be qui9etly restored within a few
                     years,, if it has not been already.
                     Public Confessions
                          If ve exclude frca consideration all those prisoners vho am
                     dealt with &A-imistratively, two questions remain:  Wby do &3.1 of
                                                  53

                 those prisoners vhO am tried in priva'ck-- confess almost vi
                 exception? Why do sow prisons-re confess at pub3.ic trials where
                 there is wtually sow opportunity to make an open denial of
                 guilt?
                       in response to the question of why prisoners at private trials
                 confess almost without exception the followin2g answers can be given:
                           (1)  The setting of the private trial as we have just
                       described it mkes it apparent to the prisoner that any
                       attempt at reewtation is useless
                            (2)  The prisoner at a primte trial is always under
                       actual threat by the MVD.  The officer in charge of his case
                       has clearly2 indicated to him that any attempt to alter or
                       recant any part of his confession will lead to an i=aediste
                       resumption of the interrogiltion-torture regimen.  This threat
                       is as poigcant as a cocked pistol.
                            (3)  We= and Positive feelings between prisoners and
                       their interrogating officers often develop duri2ng the
                       interrogation process, and uwq prisoners come to trial with
                       the feeling that., if they attempt to alter their testimony,
                       they will be dishonoring an agreement with their interrogators.
                                 Finally., it is to be empbasized that in spite of all
                       of these deterrents., sow prisoners do recant at their private
                     9  trials.  The court then decides that these prisoners have not
                                                54

                        reached a fall ava2-emwss of their cz toe - They  are  sent
                    back to the detention prison, and once again  put  throvgh  the
                    torture-interrogation regimen.  Sooner or later,, they learn
                    that pleas of "not gailte are not acceptable in Soviet
                    courts, and that they must behave themselves at their trials.
                    Otherwise
                       2         they are indefinitely detained or executed.
                    In anmmring the question of vby s!,-P- prisoners confess
                publicly vhen there is some opportunity for them to renounce their
                confessions and thereby embarrass their captors., one must consider
                the various categories of those vbo have been tried in public.
                Widely publicized trials are staged by the  C2omm=ists  only  imd  r
                exceptional circumstances and alveys for propaganda purposes.
                They are carefully -anA ed "set pieces" in  vhich  every  performer
                must play his role exactly as prescribed.  The MVD and other
                C     ist police organizations select the prisoners for these
                shows with great cam.
                     The first category 2of those vtlo have @d  public confessions
                are prominent Bolsheviks vho have fallen from grace; Zinoviev.,
                Kawmev., Fqkov., Bukh&rinj, Radek and their associates at the  time
                of the great purges; more recently,, Inse,, Rajk in Hungary,, Tmicko
                Kontov in Bulgaria,, Slansky, Clementia, and others in Czechoslovakia.,
    5            China,, etc.  The list in extensive., but not nearly so extensive
                the List of prominent Comonmist officials vho vere liquidated
                                              55

                     PtA-iAistratively., probably because they could not be trtleted at a
                     public trial.
                          But.vby did these confess, vho did so? The old Bolsheviks
                     "confessed" primarily because they vere lifelong., dedicated
                     Ccm=ists.  They had committed their lives to the belief that
                     nothin  is sacred but the Party,, and the Party is alvays right.
                     If them is a central point in the Commmist creed, it is this.
                     These men all subscribed to the belief that opposition to the Party
                     line, as expressed by the Party leaders,, is a crime.  Whatever else
                     they vere, they vere "chronic oppositionists"., and  knev  2themselves
                     to be no.  They all subscribed to the Commmist ritual of public
                     self-criticism and punisbment. Nearly &U of  then  had  at  one  time
                     or another publicly criticized themselves and had been pvnished.
                     Several had been expelled from the Party., not once but several
                     time.  They &U knev the2mselves to be in opposition to the Party
                     leadership, and they all felt guilty about this.  In spite of this@,
                     they atiu considered themselves to be Bolsheviks and vere pre-
                     pared in principle to accept any demand vhich the Party might
                     make upon then,, even to the point of death.
                          Another category of those vho have confessed  publicly  is  tb&t
   9                  group of intellectually or idealistically motivated people vho
                     vere thought to be opposed to Comwnian, or at least to be -on-
                     Comiumint., prior to their arrest. Most prominent  in  this  gr*W  is
                                                   56

                                                             other Roman
              Cardinal Hindszenty; also included In this are
              Catholic priests from the sate" ite countries much as Bishop Crttszi.
                   Still awther category Of those who have  confessed  publicly
                     rious foreign businessmen, newspapermen and military am who
              are    va
   2           were arrested or captvred in the course of their  routine  duties;
              Robert Vogeler in H=gary and William Oatis in Czechoslovakia am
              examples.  :En all of these cases,, the following factors are
               evident:
                         (1)  The confessions made by the prisoners were
                     "actually true" in the sense that the specific acts described
                     in the confessions actually oc2curred.
                         (2)  The interpretation put upon these acts vas the
                     Cozmmist interpretation.
                         (3) The prisoner had been brought to agree that in the
                     country in vhich he was arrested the Comon=ist lava applied
                     and., therefore., these acts constituted a crim.  The yr4-s--L-,r;
                    2 therefore., pleaded guilty to "crimes' which were 'crime' by
                     Ccommist definition5 but which he bad not intended as crimes
                     or considered to be crime at the time that he carried then
                     out.  This qualification., however., was missing fron the state-
                     ments mAe by the prisoners at the trials.
                   1            All of these prisoners vere under the threat  of
                     reneved torture-interrogation regimen if they  recmted  or
                     changed their confessions.
                                             57

                        (5) YANY Of the* bad the actual or implied  premis@--  as
                   vell as th@-- firm belief that they vmld be released  if  they
                   cooperated vith the police.
                        (6) Purtberjwre., all of then vere  able  to  rationalize
                   that their confessions vould not be believed by outsiders in
            2       any case*  This rationalization vas in part a correct one --
                   their confessions were widely disbelieved in the United States;
                   but in some other areas of the world their confessions am
                   accepted as factual.
                        (7)  Finally, it must be emphasized that in all these
                   cases.. though probably to varying degrees., the  brainvashin2g
                   process -- the disintegration of  personality  accompanied  b7
                   some shift in value-system -- had taken  place.  In  the  case
                   of devoted Ccmmmists, it is possible that fanatic loyalty to
                   the Party played a large part in bringing  about  the  confes-
                   sions, v%tuour, the necessity of  extensive  brai2nvashing.  On
                   the other band.. mjor shifts in their thinking processes
                   xttst have influenced the public confessions of Cardinal
                   Xiwbzenty, Vogelor and Ostia.  When absurd events and
                   incredible logic axe apparent in convincingly sincere state-
                   mute by 3mm of =oh intelligeneej, no oth5er explanati= is
                   sufficient.  These men vere red=ed to a state in vlhich their
                   conceptual processes vere no longer encumbered by processes of
                   critical judgwat.
                                            58

                 Punishment
                      The period of interrogation and detention., no matter how long
                 and terrible it my be,, is not considered imprisonment.  The
                 punishment begins only after the sentence has been passed.  Some-
                 times a lenient judge will &Uov the prisoner to count his period
                 of detention as a part of a prison sentence,, but often this period
        2         is'discounted altogether.  According to Comaunint theory,, the
                 purpose of prison systems is to rehabilitate criminals through
                 wholesome work, productive activity,, and education.  For this
                 purpose prisoners are transported to Siberia or the Arctic vbez-e
                 most of them spend their terms working in -in o and construction
                 projects under brutal an2d primitive conditions.  Those who are
                 fortmete enough to receive any education during this procedure
                 are educated by further indoctrination with Comwmint ideas.
                 Comparison of Russian and Chinese Comamint Practices
                      Frm the standpodut of imd retanding the techniques of
                 brainvusbin , the practices of the Chinese 2add little to the
                 Russian proceduresjust described.  There are, however, saw
                 general differences., a fev of which say be mentioned.
                           (1)  In Cain&., at the sownt at least, the period of
                      detention is greatly prolonged.  Whereas in the Soviet thion
                      trial and sentencing take place fairly soon after the ecuple-
                      ti2on of the interrogation and the preparation of a suitable
                                              59

                        protocol,, in ChinEL the preparation of a first confession is
                        only a prelude to a long period of indoctrination and
                        re-ed=ation, vhich may go on for years.  It is not terminated
                        until those in charge of the prisoner believe that he has
                        finally adopted a "correct" attitude and behavior.  It is 2only
                        then that the trial, the sentencing and the forml  teru  of
                        imprisonment or other pvnisboent begins.
                            (2)  Unlike the KVD, the OLinese make extensive use Of
                        gro  interaction anon  prisoners, in obtaining information,,
                        in applying pressures., and in carrying out indoctrination.
       2                     (3) The goal of the  XYD  detention  and  interrogation
                        procedure is the preparation of a protocol up= vhich a
                        suitable pmisbmnt can be based., so that the XVD can then
                        deal vith the prisoner according to its  preconceived  idea
                        of vbat met be aou  for the good of the Party and the
                      2  Soviet State.  Di a minority of cases., this includes a
                        public trial for propagmft purposes.  The KVD does not
                        appear to be greatly concerned about the  future  attituaes
                        and behavior of the prisoner., so long as be behaves      rly
                        during the period of trial and sentencing.  fte goal of the
                        Chi  se deten3tion and interrogation PrOCedure.. on the other
                        hand., is pri=wily that of insuring that the prisoner vill
                        develop   relatively long  J"ting  cbmw  in  his  attitudes
                                                60
                                           C

                         and overt behavior that vi3.1 be sustained after his relown.,
                         so that be viU not &main constitute a danger to the
                            mist state.  The securing of information by interroga-
                         tion,, the preparation of proper protocols and "confessions',,
                         and the participation of the prisoners in public propaguida
   2                      truls., are secondary to this primary goal.
                             (4)  Whereas in the Soviet Union end the satellites the
                         ritml of public self-criticism, confession, self-degradation,
                         punishment., and rehabilitation lgi a party procedure confined
                         to Comwanists,, the Chinese have extended this practi2ce to
                         the mm-party population, and to the prison population in
                         particular,, and have -d  it an important feature of their
                         ind,octrination procedure.
                              (5)  Physical torture of the traditional sort is more
                         comma.  Nwocles and leg chains are frequently used.
                              (6)  Procedures am less 2standardized.
                              (7)  Detention facilities am more primitive.
                         The essential differences appear to be in those of emphasis
                    and objective., as i=Ucated in (1) through (4) above.  The Soviet
                    objective :Ls one of secwlm a confession in a relatively short
                    time.  The Chinese objective is that of i8ndoetringltion., of con-
                    verting the victin to Comwmim; and the process my be prolonged
                    for years.  Brainvashing in but one of many techniqmes used.
                                                 61

                  Frequent lectures and emetant wA intensive social pressures are
                  also prominent elements.
                        Some persons vho have emerged from Chinese prisons have been
                  characterized by amazingly nl  red political beliefs and immediate
                  loyalty to Coammism. 7hey  have,,  indeed.,  been  described  as  th2e
                  most thoroughly brainvashed of  a3.1!  Whi2e  the  story  of  Chinese
                  indoctrination is an interesting  and  impressive  one.,  ve  believe
                  that it is :In the interest of  clear  thinkin  to  confine  our  use
                  of the term "bra:Lnvashing" to that systematic breakdovn of the
                  personality vhich is  deliberately  brought  about  for  the2  purpose
                  of securing false confessions.
                  Conclusions
                       Pz    this general description it is possible to drav tvo
                  general  conclusions  about  Communist  control  techniques.   First,
                  there is little tlat is new in their repertoire of controls.
                  A fev pages of YA.Ileus Iftleficarum*,p for example,, vi3.1  convince
                  W reader of the amazing simile-ilty betveen present-day
                  Ccmnmist braimmahing methods and those used for obtaining
                  confess:Lme of witchcraft three exA fow ceztvries W.
                  Coamniat cmtxvl of the individual and the =sees is little
        6          different fran controls exercised by virtually &3.1 absolute form
                    SUMMM, M. NLUeus Xi&leficarm.  Tg>ndon
                    ftsbkin Pftiin, 19W.  278 PP.
                                                 62

                                                               vith the Mmnmigts
                 of goveremento past and present.  What is new
                 is the extent of application and the unsurpassed organization in
                  administration of control techniques.
                       The second general conclusion is that the Ccommists have
                  developed a higbly s2ystematic use of techniques for controlling
                  the individual.  This systemization apparently bas been developed
                  Pragmatically by trial and error., rather than from the best
                  available theoretical principles.  There is evidence that no
                  scientists have participated in the actual brainvashing process.
                  And considering what is knovu of the brainvashing process,, more
                   sy2stematic application of established psychological principles
                   could probably increase the efficacy of brainvashing.
                        Both the Soviets and Chinese am flexible in developing
                   "t&Uor-madew control pressures for specific individuals.  This
                   tailoring of treatment is dependent upon saw ability to dia4pose
                   vhat combination of pressures 2vi3.1 be most effect'Lm in
                   manipulating a particular personality.
                        F4Tumlly,, it may be vorth re-empbasizing at this point that
                   =MY kinds of people who have been in the '6and  of the eommznists
                   have done many different things for many diffe   0  reas
                    all of vhicb the term "brainvasbing" has at some time been
                    applied.  Loyal communists have confessed falsely "for the good
                    of the Party"., no doubt in scoe'cases vith little ime(U&tG
                                                 63
                                            CO

                     coercion.  So= uneducated or rootless persons ba-ve been easy
                     marks for conversion to Communion.  It seems wise, bovever., to
                     reserve the tezu "brainvashing" for that assault on the perem-
                     ality vhich is a clear and prominent result of the Soviet reidnein
                     just described.3  It is that assault on the personality to vhich
                     ve sba2.1 now turn our attention.
                                                64

                          AN AU=SIS OF CONML DURING BRAINWASEM
                      Having gotten the "feel" of the Ccmr=i-st prima andl
                  interrogation procedures vhieh culminate in the false
                  confession, ve should now organize our thinking with respect
                  to just vbat is accouplished and how this objective is
                  brought about.
2                      The objective is to procure a plausible., detailed.,
                  reasonably consistent confession of crime.  A major
                  characteristic of this confession is that nearly all of it
                  in false.  Scm of the specific acts or utterances aseribecl
     31           to the victim my., to be sure, be true.  But the cr4mi  'I
                  meaning of the acts, the criminal intent of the victim in
  2                performing then., many embellishments and elaborations of
                  the acts, the victim's guilt with regard to then, an& his
                  belief that he should be V=ished-- all these are distortions.,
                  and quite at vari-ce vith the facts.
                       A second and most essential characteristic of the brain-
                  vashed., confessing indivi2dual is that be appears to have
                  developed a conviction that vhat he confesses in true.  This
                  is indeed the most wtartling elemut in the vhole picture;
                  and this is the elemut vhich demands explamtion.
                                                65

                                          C
                       An illustration may mk  this clear.  If a prisoner has
                  been chosen for brainwashing, be cannot escape going through
                  the entire process simply by indicating a viu'n= sa to
                  sign anything he is asked to sign. In public  trial,,  such
                  confessions would be unconvincingly supported by the victim,
             2     or might be denied.  The whole process must be carried through
                  to the point where the victim literally evinces  belief  in
                  his confession.
                       The key figure in the brainwashing process is the
                  interrogiltor.  He is the protagonist-amund whom the
                  prisoner develops his conflict, and upon vhool the prisoner
                  cows to 2depend as he seeks a solution  for  that  conflict.
                  He provides the general outline, though not the Aptail
                  of the great fabrication which the victim must  construct,,
                  defend., and come to believe before the process in culaimted.
                  He initiates the pressures which &re applied to the victiml"
                  and readily aftpto his own behavior to  provid2e  additional
                  pressure.  His role is predominant.
                      The process of brainwashing is essentially one in which
                  two paths are being fo"oved. One is the demoralizing pro-
                  cess
                        the remat of vhich is to reduce the victim's   critical
                  faculties to the point where he no longer discriminates
                  clearly between true and f8alseo logical and illogical. The
                                               66
                               @7

               otber is the re-OrP= 'ZiM ijzccegs, in vhieh be is reqctited to
               construct his eceession, elaborate it, defend it, and believe
               it.  Them two pzoee ses are actually going m all the time,
               though an initial softening-up usually pxeeedes the intensive
               interrogation and the initial construct of the confession.
2                    The-previous section described in sow detail the control
               pressures exerted by the Commists.  Recognition of the psy-
               chological effects of these pressures within the individual
               is,necessary to an understanding of brainvas'hin .  It should
               be noted that this is a theoretical analysis.  As indicated
               in the last section, the Commists did not design their
           2    pressures to satisfy a particular need to achieve these
               effects.
               A NMthetical Schedu3.e of Brainvashing
                    In the period imediately following capture or arrest
                           mr,-@ fz--ed with the problem of bov to exploit
               the prisoner             When, as in the case of arrested
               Soviet citizens
                 9               the arrest and interrogELtion plan already
               developed to suitable,, Little further need be done to carry
               out the assault upon the prisoner.  When the prisoner is not
               a citizen of the Comunivt country., or be is a prisoner of
               war,, a plan =at be developed from scratch.  Therefore.,
                                             67

                  initial- trczlbwnt in s@bdlar both for thaft vho are tcr  be
                  interlogp;ted for -imrbelligence a=d tk"ft vkm amw to tmft&90
                    sygitamtic br&iuvashing.  One practical conseqwnce
                  J=aediately becomes2 apparent. The minds  of  those  VhO  are
                  to be interrogated for intelligence must be kept sufficiently
                  clear and intact to permit a coherent,, undistorted revelation
                  of the desired informatim; whereas in brainvashing the
                  initial assault is upon the clarity of the thought processes.
                       Concurrently with prelivni  ry administrative contacts
  2                the prisoner undergoes a physical and psychological softening-
                  UP process.  This softening-up includes limited., unpaJAtable
                  food., regimented exercise and use of toilet facilities.,
                  withholding of reading materials, deprivation  of  tobacco,,
                  and strict Tegulation of the conditions and position of
                  sleep.
                       As previously indicated, the most important mechanion
   2               of the brainvw;hing process in the interrogation.  During
                  the course of the interrogation the interrogator may attempt
                  to elicit information  (especially in the ea" of captured
                  military personnel), to indoctrinate his victim to the Coa-
                     ist point of view., to attack his  value-aysten  and  his
                  thought processes, and to lead him through the d     ralization
  1                                                68

        and reintegmtion that characterizes the brainwashed state.
        In achieving his objective the interrogator cmtrols the
        administration of all the other pressures.
              The following emotional alltes are created v:LtILin  the
        individual during the systemtic course of the brainwashing:
                   (1) A feelin2g of helplessness in attempting to
              deal with the imersonal machinery of control.
                   (2)  An initial re4Lction of "surprise
                   (3)  A feeling of uncertalnty about vhat is required
              Of him.
                   (4) A developing feeling  of  dependence  upon  the
              interrogator.
                   (5) A sense of doubt and  a  loss  of  objectivity.
      2             (6)  Feelings of guilt.
                   (7)  A questionilm  attitude tovard his own value-
              syszm.
                   (8)  A feeling of potential abrelkdovn", :L.e.,, that
              he night go Insane.
                   (9) A need to defend kdo acqulxed principles.
                 (10)  A final muse of "belonging" (:Ldent:Lfication).
              gie order in vkdch the feelings are eagm&red v:ltbin the
        individual my wary somewhat; but  all  are  necessary  to  the
        brainwashing process.
                                      69

            A feeling of belplesemes in attempting to deal  vith
       the inpersoml machineT7 of control develo%w  vithin  the
       individual during the early stages. The  individual  vho
       receives the softening-up treatnent described above  not
       only begins to feel like an animl but feels also that
       nothing can be done about it.  No  one  p2ays  any  personal
       attention to hlw.  His ecaplaints fall on deaf esre.    His
       lose of eommication, if he  has  been  iso2a+.ed.,  ereates  a
       feeling that  he  bas  bee  forgotten.  Everything  that  bappe
       to him occurs according to an impersonal time schedule tbglt
       has nothing to do vith his needs.  fte voices and footsteps
       of the  guards  am  wited.  H2e  notes  many  =mtrests.  The
       eel I a are clean but he is filthy His   gre"y,   mpalat4tble
       food is served on battered tin dishes by guards I-mculately
       d.ressed in vhite.  The  first  steps  in  "depersonalization"
       of the prisones bave begun.  ]Ee has no idea vbat to expect.
       Ample opportunity is  allotted  for 2 him  to  rmlmte  upon  all
       'the mpleas=t or  painful  things  tbat  could  happen  to  WA.
       le approaches the ulin interrogation with ui  d feelings
       of relief and fright.
           2he controlled  individual  is  constantly  exl>eriencing
       surprise.  ftat is,, vbat he expects is often not vbat actually
                          4           70

          happens to him.  Pa-rel7 is the ijritsone., prepared for the fact
          that interrogators are often initially friendly  and
          considerate. They make "ery  effort  to  demonstrate that they
          are reasonable hi-m beings.  Often they apologize  for any
          bad treatment received by the prisoner and promise to Japrove
   2       the prisoner's lot if be,, too,, is reasonable.  This behavior
          is not vbat the prisoner has steeled himself for.  Be lets
          dovn some of his defenses and tries to take a reasonable
          attitude.  The first occasion) hovever., that the prisoner
          balks at satisfying a request of the interrogator, he  is  in
          for another surprise. The  formerly  reasonable  interrogator
          unexpecte2dly turns into a furious -,PLY%iac vho screams epithets.
          The interrogator my slap the pris    r or draw his pistol and
          threaten to shoot him. Usually this storm of  emotion  ceases
          as suddenly as it began and the interrogator stalk  from  the
          room.  2b--se smpr sing changes create a doubt In the
          prisoner as to his very ability to perceive another  person's
          notivati6ms co.L.L etly. His next interrogation,, as likely as
          not, vill be mark d by the very impassivity of the interrogator's
          mien.
              A feeling of uncertainty about vbat in required of him
          likevise results from the priamer's early contacts  with  the
                                      71

          Interrogator.  Pleas of the prisoner to learn sPL-L-ifitaliy of
          vbat he lx aeevae and by v     are sidestepped by the
          interrogator.  Initially the interrogation is left unstt=-
          tured.  The prisoner is asked to tell. vhy he thigir be in
          held and vbat he feels he is guilty of.  If the prisoner fails
          to come UP vith SaYthing, he is accused in terms of broad
          generalities (e.g.., espionage, sabotage., aets of treason
          against the Mpeople",, etc.).  This usually provokes the pris-
          oner to      oom gutement about his activities.  If this
          takes the form of a denial, he is usually sent to isolation
          an further decreased food rations to 'think over" his crim2es.
              Isolation appears to be an unusually effie=iow control
          pressure.  lnftriftal differences in psychological reaction
          to isolation axe very great.  Sow incuri&nls &"ear to be
          able to withstand prolonged periods of isolation vithout
          del-eteri@mn eftect; vhile a relatively sh2ort period of iso-
          lation reduces others to the verge of psychosis.  Pay-
          chological reaction varies considerably with the conditions
          of the isolation cell.  Some indivirlm's have ImUcated a
          strong reaction to the filth and vermin,, although they had
          negLWble reactions to the isolation itself.  Others., how-
          e"r.. reacted violently to isolation 2in relatively clean cells.
 t                                   72

                                    -T'mo;o TIa Pu's nOT-'490TJTI.VJ2 T-ru -',.@uampTtmd TTV JO aoznog
                                       014 ST -101@V90=--4uT OR!:@ '@vq'4- QZTTVOZ O'@ BMT UTq 84V-4 4on
                                      B2OOP '@l  '-rOl@IBOZznuT OR-4 uodu aourmadep j:o agme 2m=,Ig
                                       'O *UdOTOA--'P ST TvnpTATPuT paTToilimoo --Iql@ 8TTtlanveN
                                                                                 "@T TSTO puv gpioil
                                   'rRO 9TIq 'IT '4U--umqvl-o gTq V-AOP 0'4.;AA O'@ P--qsu 'IT zQQOST-zd au
                                 'POTJBT4v9 4TXnu--mm szvaddi jo-4.vgo=--,@4uT --q!@ 90TIvaTNT a
                      2                                                                          r u-;
                                       -JTa* P=SPTBUOD Oq qxg?Tu 49q-@ 2uTtnmos JO 3pmM UVO aq
                                    Ov UOO'G SY  'ATOLD aTq%uQTO,4.uT aqo@ 3[v,,a6zq o-Y, asTmiAima -.Mg
                                      a    0'4 P-10.zOJ ST -zauostzd -.q;L  -utvft pxm u.;vft pg,4.,godaz
                                           aq uvO 'aOT'@990=al@n BuTrnP uOTBBOJUGo 'a zo,; vpuump
                                    2q!@TA nOT'4vTO,8T JO 9POT.Zad BUT-4.=unTv JO itigooo sTq&
                                                                              -qAZ4AO PUD 9=T,4.Va
                                                                  szvoj
                                -TDTLTlvq PTATA PaUodai i2;,.@oaVqns Tnu=T-ladxa     savp JO z
                                     PnTuTT AzaA v uvq,@ azon joj   gMT-4-OUM aAT,@0;arqns uAo gTq
                                  2uT'@SZOTO-4. JO STqvdvOuT ST TvnPT-AR=T aq!@ Paev=,Qp ATTWT.@V
                                 -uneas lusk avq uOT'4vrnmT-18 Ajosues tratin 11,@vq-4. po-:@voTpuT svq
                                q=ws--V  'WWUO Pua IZOsu8s BTq JO OOTIvTrx;-4s TvTWajajjTp
                         2         JO ImPTATPuT aq% OATzdgP 01. OtrTq=00 TTV "'4.0v@,Wo TVTDOII JO
                               a=lafq'B -aRl- 'PMIO* J:O.'XQVT aW '(142TT JO 3IOmT TVIDI@ zo) STTWL
                                   Qq!:4@ JO OSQQ9---a la--@Aa avA  'uOTWrnNT'49 Azoszme JO S(OMT M
                                   aq o,4 exuadda WTIovw j.-4Vq aql. ;o -,4mvo      --@mogazd aqz

                                            TOAL
          cation that the prisone.L can bave.  'The
          vhile I     trates his unpredietability   Be in pereeived
          by the prisonex as a creature of vhim.  At times the inter-
          rogator e= be pleased very easily and at other  times  no
          effort on the part of the prisoner will placate him.  The
          prisoner may begin to channel so sucb energy into trying to
          predict the behavior of the unpredictable interrogator that
          he loses track of vhat is happening inside  himself.  His
          recognition of dependence upon a relatively 7mpredietable
          interrogator Is a some  of intense Internal conflict.
              After the prisoner has developed the above PCy--  logical
          and emotiowl reactions to a sufficient degree., the brain-
          vashing begins in earnest.  First the prisoner's remaining
          critical faculties must be destroyed. He umdergoes long.,
          fatiguing interrogations vhile looking at a bright light.
          Be is called back again and again for interrogations
          after        sleep.  Drugs my be used to accentuate   his
          mood swings.  Be develops depression vhe6n the interrogator
          is being kind and becomes euphoric vben the interrogator
          is threatening the direct penalties.  And then the cycle in
          reversed. The prisoner finds himself in a constant  state
          of anxiety vhich prevents him from relskving even vben he is
                                      74

                                                                                                                                               
@p         qo
                                                                                                                                               
43         4H                   4-3'                2                                k
                                                                                                                                               
%I         0
                                                                                                                q,.4      D
                                                                                                                0                              
0
              2                                                                                                                                
t          1         4          g                     43
                                                                                                                to                            
to         A                                         a            0       0         V         t                                          I
      2                                                                                                                                        
-P
                                                                                                                C)                             
a                                                     11       9
                                                                                                                         2                     
10
                                                                                                                                               
V4
                                                                                                                                               
2    g          0
                                                                                                                                               
to                                        d
                                                                                                                                               
to
                                                                 2                                                                             
4)         4i        +-
                                                                                                                          to                   
(a
                                                                                                                          0                    
2                                "A        R
                                                                                                                          r-i                  
FA
                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                            2                  
In         *4
                                                                                                                          Al
                                                                                         49                     to        P.
                                                                               -on
                                  2                                                                                                            
43                              to
                                                                                                                                             
Id                     i
                                                                                                                                               
44      +31                                                                       43
                                                                                                                          0        -1          
0                                                                      43
                                                                                                    43
                                                              2                                                                                
43
                                                                                                                                               
40                     ci
                                                                                                                                               
5                       0                                                     o

          endless argument vith his interrogi&tor. fie my be faced
          vith the confessions of other individuals vho meoDAborated!'
          with him in his crims.  The pri    r serious4 begins to
          doubt his own newry.  This feeling is beightened by his
          Inability to recall little things like the nanes of 2the
          people he knoim very well or the date of his birth.  The
          interrogator patiently sharpens this feeling of doubt and
          vacertainty by a clever line of questioning.  For e   le, if
          the goal of the brainvashing is an admission of participation
          in gerin-vexfam activities., the following questions my be
          asked inftwssantly:  "I)id you personally supervise the loading
          Of bCabS in your plane? Did you know exactlv vhat vas in
          each of them?  Did you count the explosions of the bombs you
          dropped? Are you sure? Were you told to hit secondarv
          taxgei"6 !Z Xuu couldn--L aeblieve vour primary targets? Were
          You ordered to drop all of your bombs ve3.1-vithin eneaw
      2    territor7? Were sow of your explosives of the anti-pervonnel
          tYPe? Are You sure that nOn  of your bombs contained bacuria?
          If you personally had any objection to the uft of such geru-
          v8.rfare veapme., do you think your superiors vould have told
          YM vbat You vere carrying? etc., etc."  This line of questio6n-
          ing,, vhen the 4ndividual has lost most of his critical
                                     76

ILL
        faculties., tends to ereat a serious state of uncertainty.  This
        has been demonstrated., wben accompanying pressures vere virtually
        nil, under experimental conditions.
            7he prisoner must suffer additional internal conflict vhen
        strong feelings of guilt are aroused within him.  As any clinical
        psychiatrist is aware., it is not at all difficult to create s2uch
        feelings.  Military personnel a-re particularly vulnerable.  No
        one can morally justify killing even in wartime.  The usual
        justification is on the grounds of necessity or self-defense.
        7he interrogator is careful to circumvent such justification.
        He keeps the interrogation directed tovards the prisoner's
        personal moral code.  (Why is the prisoner personally killing
        civilians and troops who h2ave never done anything to him?  Did he
        personally vant to fight this war, or vas he drafte&?)  Every
        moral vulnerability is exploited.  (Wv does the prisoner feel
        about the fact that the weapons of war cannot be sufficiently'
        controlled to guarantee the killing only of soldiers?  Or did
        the "Arm yank rs" desiga them that vay?  Does the prisoner
        really believe in fi&ting to su3pport colou'AIim?  Would the
        prisoner feel any obligation to support his country if an attack
        vere =ad  upon Heidco?  How is this different from the Cbin Be
        position in Korea?  What does the prisoner feel about the fact
        that the U.S. vas the first to utilize nuclear weapons in
                                     77

                                 ooppl-
         varfare?  DDes the prisoner support wholeheartedly all the policies
         of his goverment?  :If not, doesn't this war support some of the
         policies he does not approve?  Is the prisoner a Christian?  DDes
         Christianity condone slaughter of the type meted out  by  air
         bombings?)  Incessant questioning of this type tends to arouse many
         doubt2s based upon irrational guilt feelings.  7be prisoner begins
         to question the very fundamentals of his own value-system.  One
         brainwashed priest reported that after interrogation  he  really
         beg= to feel intense guilt about the very missionary work to which
         he bad devoted his entire life. Constantly., the  prisoner  must
         fight off a potential breakdown.      finds that his 2-inA  is
          going blank" for longer and longer periods of time.  Be cannot
         think constructively. If he is to  mintain  any  semblance  of
         psychological integrity., he must bring an end to this  state of
         Interminable internal conflict. Be  signifies  a  willingness to
         write a confession.
              If this vere truly the end, no brainwashing would have actually
         occurred.  22he Individual would simply have "given  inn to intoler-
         able pressure. Actually the finoll stage of  the  brainwashing
         process has just begun.  No matter vbat the pr:i    r writes  In
         his confession, the Interrogator is not satisfied.  2be interrogEL-
         +.or questions every sentence,, ever7pbraseof the  confession9. Be
         begins to edit vbile working with the prisoner.  7be prisoner is
                                      78
                       ;!7         IM7

                                 COWMVte
          forced to argue age-ir-st every change, every ApwmlnA for inereeaed
          self-incrimination.  7his is the very essence of brajmwashing!
          The prisoner has begun to argue__for maintaining statements that
          he would not have accepted prior tc, the ecmmncement of brain-
          vasbing.  Ever2y time that he gives in on a point to the interro-
          gator., he must rewrite his whole confession.* Still the
          Interrogator is not satisfied.  In a desperate attempt to maintain
          some omblance of integrity and to avoid further brainvashing, the
          prisoner zust.begin to argue that what he has already confessed
          is true.  He begins to accept as his ovn the statements he has
          2written-  Subtly, step by step, he has identified with a new
          value-system.  The  prisoner uses many of the interrogator's
          earlier arguments to buttress his position.  He believes what he
          has stated.  By this process identification with the interrogator's
          *Tj',.at "simple Pavlovian conditioning" accounts for what occurs
          in the final stages of brainwashing is a common misconception.2
          The major si-il  ity between vhat happens to Pavlov's dog and
          vhat happens in brainvas-hing lies in the preparation of the dog
          for the conditioni  experiment.                can be likened
          w-leb more fruitfully to the more complex concept of "instrumental
                                 which requires that the
          avoidance cond:Ltionin            2                     "discover
          a solution to avoid pain.  It is much more difficult to
          "de-condition" an animal that has learned in this vay.  Actually
          brainwashing requires a creative act of learning (internal re-
           Fmnization of the thought processes) on the part of the
          brainwash-victim.  'This does Dot imply that he could '%elp'
          learning any more than the child can "help" 4learning that fire
          is hot and should be avoided.
                                       79

         value-system becomes ccmplete. it is extremely important to
         recognize that a qualitative change has taken place within the
         prisoner. The brainvash-victim does not consciously change ble
         value-system; rather the change occurs despite his efforts.
         He is nc more responsible for this change than is an individual
         vbo "2omps" and becomes psychotic. And like the psychotic, the
         prisoner :La not even aware of the transition.
              An interesting point is raised by the behavior of returned
         pr:ieoners-of-war who bad been brainwashed during the Korean
         conflict. Some of these individuals stood court-mrtial; others
         vere vilified in the press. One vonderr, vhy they did mn eV,
         "I was br2ainwashed    I believed at the time vhat I said over
         the racUo",, in their own defense. Apparently they could not
            1 Ai Ti clearly wbat happened to them. One vonders if this
         imbility to cammicate their experience is related to & Most
         interesting psychiatric finding that it is virtually impossible
         for a recovered schizophrenic to tell vh2at a psychotic "8t4Lte"
         is        All that he can say is that it is mimglmbly
         horrible-             Ocne Of the brainwashed have characterized
         their own experiences as 'indescribable".
         Aftermath
             Since the changed value-o"tem of the braimmsh-victim has
         developed in a severely controlled environment vben his critical
                                     80

            judgment vas at Its nadi   it can be considered, in a sense, like
            and "enforced schizophrenia".  'The victim literally liforgets"
            m=y of the events that occurred during the brainwashing process.
            If owh an analogy is useful,, it could be predicted that the
            brainmah-victim., once freed from oppressive controls and having
2            recovered his critical faculties,, would undergo a spontaneous
            reintegration and recovery vith the passage of tim.  This appears
            to be the case.  Accompanying this recovery of a'value-system more
            consistent with his beliefs prior to brainwashing is the gradual
            recall of the various aspects of the brainwashing process itself.
0
                                       81

