                                                                17 September 1971
                      Dear
                           As You know it is necessary @.@or the Project Officer to write a
                      trip report summari--inv action items undertaken during visits with the
                      contractor.  I completed such a report shortly after my return.  In
                      essence, the report of f2uture action was con"ruent with the plan out-
                      liiied in your latest quarterly report.  Some of the -eneral comments
                      of my supervi--ors and other knowledgeable people in t&ie area of non-
                      lethal oersonnal incapacitation, and with wliich I largely agree, seem-
                      i;orthy of passing on to you.  ",here is not a great deal of confidence
         2             L'.hat the inve3tioation of           1-will produce leads or clues that
                      will merit detailed study, allhou-h     hope to be pleasantly surprised.
                          You indicated  that the Visual Systems Analysis paper would be used
                      as a -uida for the incapacitation analysis, altholgh perhaps not with
                      the same scope.  T,iLs is quit2a-reasonable since that paper is largely
                      a plan for a Systems analysis of visual incaoacitation atid if the plan
                      were implemented it would be a najor project in itself.  A13o you will
                      note that that paner indicates in the footnotes that the format utilized
                      was sua,30stivO oniy and not to be considered as a rigid framework.
            2          Undoubtedly, it will be necessary to modify your format as you and your
                      staff feel will best oortray the ingormatioa.
                          on pago 2 of your quarterly revort you cite seven different aspects
                      oE incepacit:,ition systems that :ill be reviewed for the systems analysis.
                      In view of the         Icapability and orientation, I feel e.,aphas2is
                      chould be placed upon item.,.:    Physiolo-ical, biochemical, psycho-
                      lo,,ical and medical considerations; (4) Results or effects, type and
                      degree of performance decrement; and (7) Reco=endations.' In sinnf"ry,
                      the information of greatest value to us would be systematic formulation
                      of in@-ormatio7n from the hiolo-ical sciences concerning various  categories
                      of personnel incapacitation in some sort of matrix fashion which would
                      pravide guidelines for avoidin- blind alleys and rediscoverins  the  wheel,
                      indicating -aps in current scientific Imowled-a and  intalli-ent  direction

                      17 September 1971
                      Par,,a 2
                      of research ef@4ort.  I reali--e that it will be difficult  to   organize
                      the in'6ormation you hive collccted, incorporatin- the             leapa-
                      bility, in a rystems analysis format.  The roadblocks will not be
                      apparent until attempts are-2made  to  organize  the  diverse  information
                      into a readily c=prehansible structure.  Perhaps after your new
                      additions to the staff have become saturated %#ith the bacitground
                      material and have attempted the or-anization taslf., I i,7LI1 be able  to
                      visit ;ith you for a loar,,er period to discuss your recomm9endations for
                      the sysccms analysis format and scope.
                                                                     Best personal regards,

