                                         February 15, 1967
                         Period Cover'ed:  June 15, 1966 Lo January 31, 1967
              I.  Summary
                                                 dinas  obtained  during  this  first  phase
                  Certain key e..cperimental fin     0                  acions  cited   in
              oZ the research have been combined with earlier observ
              the project propcsal to produce a model of best fit for the electroder-@-,Ial
              system. It encompasses both a dual peripheral  effector  -rechanis,-.i  and  a
              central control system.  It  assians  little  or  no  fuaction  to  vascular
              mechanisms.   It lias been used to develoo a new 7@ethcd 'or analysis  o-i@'
              the skin conductance response which has    been hi-l2-hly s@--czesslul in
              accon,plishino sortina of qualitatively different behavidral states
              without utilizing reosponse amplitude as such.  The new method should lend
              itself readily to automation.
              II.  Snec fic Experimenta! Flndines
                   A.    Periphe-:al @lectianism
                         1.  microelectrode Observations:
                             2.@c,in potentials were  sirultaneously  recor6ed  from  sweat
                         pores and from areas on the palmar surface between sweat
                         pores I.epi-derrial sites), tocether tiith-a macroscopic recordi@ng
                         from a nearby 0.3cm2  site  (a25  subjects).  Pure  positive  waves
                         pure negative waves  and  biphasic  waves  were  usu2ally  obtained
                         from either ri-croscopic  site  with  equal  frequency,  althou-n
                         in a few subjects, the  epidermal  sit-s  showed  predo,-tinantly
                         positive responses uhile  the  pores  produced  ne-ative  or  bi-
                         phasic waves. For the  population  as  a  wlole,  no  pattern  was
                         detectable which allowed  prediction  of  the  particular  2@iave-
                         form at eitlier type of microscopic site.
                             One observation of interest was the frequent occl-sions
                         in wh3ch the microelectrodes  on  tne  sweat  pore  and  epidermis
                         showed only positive waves  while  the  macroscodic  site  shoi;ed
                         pure ne-ative waves (Fig. 1).  This  is  attribiited  to  the  Fact
    0                     that the -,iacroscopic site was covered with el-actrode par-te and
                                                                       Approve,i fcr @lelzs$3
                                                                        PaLe

                     ..........
                            2- mv
                                                       EP I DERM I s
                                                         G,ZC)SS
                            2 SEC
                                   us riicroelectrode recordings frord a smeat pore frori
                    I.   Si-,,nultaneo  2                                             " 11 on
                                                     rom a nearby macroscopic site a
               the area betwee-n sweat pores, and f
               the volar surface of the fin"ller.  in this exa-,iple the aross site  shows
                                             a                           0
               a negative response,,       4despite the positive activity in the mic3ro-
               scopi.c sites.  '@ie,.-ative is upwards.

                           with an electrode  while  the  microclectrode  si@,es  were  exposed
                           to air and were considerably drier.  1-.Iicn dry macroscopic
                           electrodes made of woven silver  cloth  (to  all:)w  the  site  to
                           remain dry) were used, the  same  effect  was  obtained,  nl-riely
                           prominent positive waves at the 2dry site, while negative
                           waves or  negative  with  weak  positive  components  occurred  at
                           the wet site (Fig. 2).  This effect is   'consistent with the
                           predictions of a  hydration  effect  reczntly  disc7overed  at  this
                           labora:ory  and  investigated  further  under  the  present  contract.
                           It poi-its 2out that the presence of  two  areas  in  the  skin  with
                           different  potentials  must  result  in  internal  circuit   currents.
                           The potential observed at  the  surface  is  then  deter-mined  by
                           the value of the  ttio  *enerators  and  their  internal  resistances.
                           If the internal  resistance  (which  includes  the  sweat  duct  and
                           the horn2y layer, as well  as  any  r-embranes  involved)  is  reduced,
                           the surface potential will move in the direction of that
                           generator  wnose  internal  resistance  is  affected.   Thus,   when
                           sweat overflows into  the  dry  corneum,  it  reduces  the  resistance
                           of the horny layer and  brings  ttie  surface  potential  closer  to
                           the potential of the epi2der-,nis  which  is  less  ne-ative  than  the
                           sweat pore.  This mechanism makes  it  i!Tperat@.ve  to  work  with  a
                           completely hydrated  preparation  if  this  spur@@ous  effect  is  not
                           to be confused with true positive  potentials,  such  as  @-,,ay  be
                           recorded with the site irur,.ersed tn 2dilute saline.
                               S-'@nce the spiral duct  appears  to  be  rela:ively  freely  per-
                           meable to ions as it passes through the horny layer, the
                           corneum acts as a volume  conductor  when  r,,.oist  and  interferes
                           with the  separation  of  sweat  gland  and  membrane  effects  by
                           means of 'S@it'Lace -,iicroelectrode  record2in-s.  To  eliminate  this
                           effect and  also  the  hydration  effect  described  above,  the  skin
                           is now being prepared by  slicing  at-ay  most  of  the  cor-ieun,  so
                           that the microelectrode may  rest  alriiost  on  the  granular  layer,
                           or may be  inserted  directly  into  the  exposed  sweat  duct  at
                           Lhis  Level.  About  122  exploratory  experiments  have   been   run
                           to de,.,elop this technique and a series with -a fixed experi-.nental
                           desi-n has  beeti  initiated.  Sur-Drisinaly,  the  potential  at  the
                           surfa@--e pore is 10 to 20 -,nv more  neoative  than  the  potential
                           within the lumen of  the  duct  at  the  aranulax  or 2 iialpi-hian
                           layer. This may  be  in,laicative  of  a  diffusicn  potential  across
                           the spiral  duct  wall.  Also  surprisin-  is  t@-e  observation  of
                           positive as well  as  neeacive  and  bipha-sic  waves  from  %iithin
                           the  exposed  lumen  a-6  the  deeper  level.  Experiments   entailing
                           simultaneous0 microelectrode  recordings  froin  the  duct  and  fro-,a
                           the  -ranular  layer  are  in  progress.  These   should   hopefully
                           furn'ish definici-@ie infor,-,,iation on the ori-ia of  the  different
                           for,TE of potential response.

                                                                                      2 m
                                                            -----------------
                                                                                       2 mv
              DRY
                                                          -C
                         10 SEC
                                                                       8               .10 mv
           Fig. 2.  Comparison of recordit,gs from a conventional (iiet) site and a
           si-nilai dry site covered with porous sil-ver cloth.  Note greater positivity
           in the dry site.

                                                                                                  3
                           2.  Aninial E--<Derimcnts:
                             A series  of  experiments  was  run  on  6  cats  to  investigate
                           the  characteristics  of  conductance  and  potential  response  in
                           the  foocpad  as  a  function  of  the  pattern  of  electrical2  scillu-
                           lation  of  the  plantar   nerve.   Following   repetitive   stimulation
                                8/sec,  15 volts, 5 sec.) there is an i-.i@tial      iu@, men t-- t ion
                           Of the conductance response  to  single  shock  stinuli.  The  a,.-ipli-
                           tude of this response, tested at 30-second intzrvils, drops
                  2         progressively to  about  50  percent  of  its  initial  value  over  the
                           course  of  4  minutes  followin-  the  repetitive  volley.   i4hen   it
                           reaches this level, another repetitive volley causes an im@tediate
                           doublin-, of the fesponse to the standard  sin-.le  shock  (Fi,,.P.  3).
                           The decay then proaresses as before. 2 This phe-,iomenon also
                           occurs  when  skin  potential  responses  are  monitored.  It  4-s   not
                           due  to  base  level  effects  (base  level  may  be  altered  by   only
                           5  percent  durin-  the  repetitive  volley  and   may   fully   recover
                           by  the  time  the  first  hichly  augmenr-ed  response  is   elicited).
                               2                      0
                              Another  experimental  findin-   in   these   experiments   concerned
                           the  behavior  of  a  second  response  superi-.nposed  on  a  precediig
                           one.  The findlnos of an earlier study indicated that the
                           amplitude  of  a  second  conductance  response  was  the  same  as  the
                           first,  except  for  the  steepest  portion2  of   the   recovery   slope
                           of the first t.,,ave, at  which  point  the  second  wave  was  markedly
                           atcenuated.  This pheno-,aenon was confir,.ned and extended to
                           potential  response  measures.  The  behavior  of   the   potential
                           sum.-nati-on processes was  almost  identical  to  that  of  conductance
             2              summation.  In these experiments, for an unknown reason,
                           attenuation  of  the  second  response  on  the   downward   slope   was
                           considerably -reater than in the first series.
                              The  above  findina@s  su--ested  numerous  follow-up   experi@-.ents
                                                 0    00
                           which  could  help  lay  the  basis2  for  the  calibration  of  electri-
                           cal chan-es  in  terms  of  nerve  activity.  Hotiejer,  these  ex-
                           perimeats i-jere halted when it  was  iearned  tha--  the  sweat  glands
                           of the cat  footpad  are  apocrine  (G.  H.  Wana,  The  Neural  Control
                           of  S@4eat,-ng,  1964).  This  has  profound  implications  with  re2card
                           to  the  interpretation  of  measurements  from  the  cat  AlootDad.  it
                           renders the extrapolation  of  such  results  to  bu,-,.an  measurerents
                           hiohly suspect.  Investicators have, however, for several decades
                           utili              f2gt                                     rep4racion.
                                zed the cat       pad as a2n experimental eccrine p
                           Consul:ation with;                     %an   investigator    well    ex-
                           perienced  in  workin@g  with  the  cat-Tootpad,  revealed  that   there
                           is considerable question as to the validity of T%Ianals statetent.
                           Until  this  matter  is  cleared  up,  however,  this  series   of   ex-
                           periments is7 potentially irrelevant and qill be suspended.
                           3.  Nail Plate Recordings;
                               ST)ecial ef,-Forts were -,ade to inst-,re that the pac:@nc4-al  res-

           150 K
                     30
                                                                            f
                     SEC
          160 K
                                    REPETETIVE
                                     STI[.$ULVS
             Fig. 3.  Potentation of the skin resistance response fro,-,t the cat "Loot-
                             I
             pad followi0na a repetitive volley (V),

                                                                                               4
                           ponses recorded from the   nail  plate,  previously   reported,   were
                           Dot arcifacts of potentials generated in normal skin on the
                           opposite or lateral  sides  of  the  finger  and  transmitted  to  the
                           nail electrode by virtue  of  tli(!  volume  conductor  properties  of
  2                         the fin-er.  A portion of the nail plate near the distal, lateral
                           portion of the fin-er was cut away to c.-.pose the intact nail bed.
                           Two  siriultaneous  m'Lcroelectrode  recordings  were  obtained  from
                           this  area.  The  most  common  recordinas  were  puie  positive  SPRS.
                           When one of the  microele2cr-rodes  was  pushed  barely  throu-h  tl-e
                           upper-,r,ost layer of the nail bed,  the  potential  showed  a  con-
                           spicuous positive  shift  of  the'order  of  15mv  and  potential
                           responses  were  markedly  attenuated  at  this  e'-ectrode.  The  con-
                           trol electrode  remained  active  (Fi-.  4).  In  three  of  the  four
2                           subjects  thus  examined,  puncture  caused  attenuation  of  the
                           response (to a  word  association  test)  to  less  than  5  percent
                           of the control level;  in  two  of  these  the  response  was  essen-
                           tially  abolished.  When  the  microeleccrode  was   withdrawn   and
                           placed on the surface of the nail bed adjacent to the point
                      2     of  entry,  activity  reappeared.  The  fourth  subject  showed  t!ie
                           positive  shift  with  puncture  but  response  amplitude,  ini-tially
                           loi.;, uas  not  diminished.  Althouah  this  evidence,added  to  the
                           earlier indirect  evidence-gave  conpellinc,  sut)port  to  the  con-
                           tention that the  response;  did  in  fact  originate  in  th2e  surface
                           of the nail bed, some  doubt  was  cast  on  the  supposition  that  the
                           nail bed represents pure  epiderL-,41  tissue  Lfree  of  sweat  -lands)
                           as describe'rl by histologists.                  "ireported the
                           findirg of sweat ducts along tt@e--distal m-a-r--c-@Ln of the nail which
                          2 i,nvaded the nail field (personal communication).           ',photo-
                           -raphs do show  the  spiral  ducts  entering  the  peripnery  of  the
                           nail bed for a distance of I to 2          I-Theth@r  these  traversed
                           the nail bed  much  further  is  uncertain;  since  nail  recordin-.s,
                           except for those described above, are tal&en as close to th2e
                           center of the nail  bed  as  possible,  it  is  thouaht  unlikely
                           that  the  potential  recordings  are  contaminated  by  the  products
                           of s@qeat  gland  activity.  However,  until  this  factor  is  clearly
                           resolved, the evidence from the  nail  bed  -,nusz  be  accepted  with
                           reservations.  Histolo-ical  data  is  now  bein-  sought  co   sett2le
                           this issue.
                           4.  A'-teracion of SPR Wavefor-,n with Surface Solutions:
                               An  earlier  study  had  demonstrated  that  total  anplitude  of
                           the e'-ectrodernal  response,  conductance  or  prrenr4-al,  could  be
                           altered by the  exposure  of  the  site  to  various  sol.utions.  A
                         2  follov-ug study was undertaken  to  deter-,Tiine  4hether  the  positive
                           and  negative  conponents  could  be  selectively  altered  by  this
                           procedure. The exposure  of  palmar  sites  to  ID[  AICI  was  @lound
                           to potentiate the positive response by an avera-e o@
                                                                               ";,  -  750  percent
2                           (average on  7  subjects).  The  ne-ative  respo-ise  w@ns  atcenuated
                           to 54 percent of control,  but  this  may  si-iplv  reflect  the  can-
                           cellin@; efiect imposed by the i-,icrease in a.-,Dlitude  of  the

                Control
                                                                M. VI
                 E   pt I
                    t                 A                                           c
            Fi,,. 4.  Simultaneous -,nicroelectrode recordin-6 from the nail bed showirg
            Po 'tive responses to wor
              s?                     d associations.  in the center panel, one -.iicra-
            electrode has been pushed throuah the ger-,ninating layer and responses have
                                           u
                      d.  To the riht, this electrode has been withdrawn aoain and
            disappeare             0
            reolaced on the surface near the puncture.

                                Al
                                                        NaCi
                     NaCi
                              [2my
                              t
                                                        AIC'3
                       i,Ci
                      N
                                        A                                       B
             Fig. 5 -  Potentiation of the positive SPR9 wave by 1 11 A'C'3'     Nleaative
              is up@..,ards.

                                                                                 5
                                  in tlle complex  (FiS.    Tt is of special si@'-
                        positive wave
                        nificance zhat the earlier study on the conductance response
                        showed an average of over 6COpercent increase in this measure.
                        This su-gests that the conduc2tance response may be associated
                        with the positive wave.
                        Another a-ent tried was 5,Nl NaCi.  This had not been tested
                        for its effect on amplitude of conductance response, but had
                        been sho@qr, to reduce resistance to 5 percent of control level.
                        The effect on the potential response t-;aveform was a conspicuous
                        p2otentiation of the "ell wave, a n.egative overshoot L4hLch
                                                    wave.
                        sometimes follows the posit@@      Uniphasic iegat@ive waves
                        were unaf--@ected (Fio,,. 6).  Until the efi'Lect on the resistance
                        response is determined, this effect cannot be fully interpreted.
                        it is pre3ently considered to reflect a lytic effect on an
                        ionic barrier, presumably the semi-permeable mewbrane res-
                                                       This membrane, accordina to
                        ponsible for the positive iqave.                      c@
                        earlier studies from this laboratory, must be accessible to
                        surface agents, and behaves as a2n ivftperfectly selective cation-
                        permeable membrane.  The initial phase of the response is seen
                                              -cmeability to cations, :esultin,@, in a
                        as an increase in the pe                              I
                        hyperpolarization, i.e., in a negative wave.  A3 the brealt-@down
                        of membrane resis2tance proceeds, the relative ...,.perrieabili-ty
                        to chloride is apparently lost and depolarization occurs,
                                                                 cyrity of the -,ne:?.brane
                        resulting in a positive wave.  As the inte,
                                 I         t effect is thou-ht to be recovery of the
                        is restored  the firs               0
  2                      relative impermeability to anions.  if the reccrvery period is
                        prolon-ed, there nay be an appreciable delay bc_fore the per-
                        meability to cations is reduced to normal.  During this phase,
                                ne will be hyperpolarized, resultin.- in a second
                        the membra                                  7
                        nec,ative wave or 2overshoot, terned the "c" wave.  A concen-
                        troated electrolyte such as 5LNt LN'AC! is thoughc co loosen r,,.embrane
                        structure (to wit, the profound reduction in resistance) so that
                                  prolonged, accentuatinc@ the negati-je overshoot.
                        recoverv is
                          The above concept of2 the rembr@ne process in the electro-
                        der-Lnal response also e-.,@plains the effect of AlCI3-  The
                                                                    ne-ative c-haraes
                        absorption of the aluminum ion by the fixed   0          0
                                                                  lization and incioient
                        of the membrane would cause part2ial neutra
                        loss of selective imperni-ability to anions.  lihen the -,ie:-.brane
                        break4cwn occurs during the response, tne loss of impe--,-neability
                                                       e marked, resuiting in areater
                        to anions is therefore much mor                       0
                        depolarization and a stronoer positi3ve wave.  Although this
                        explanation and that for the effect of 5M NACL are hypothetical,
                        they are consistent with a nur-,ber of other exoerimental obser-
                        vations and in part fom, the basis of the newly for-ned iodel
                        of eleztroder.-ial activity.

                       Ask
                          (2mv
                   0. I
                   5. 0
              Fig. 6.  Potezitiation of the SPR c-wave by 5 M N-aCl.  Ne-ative is upwards.
                        UT)-nor tra-ce, 0.1 I.'.        l,o-er '.recc,,                Tintifes.

                                                                                           6
                        5.  Producti-on of a Positive Potential Response by Local
                           @ice@,anical E'4fect-
                           In 1921,  Ebbeeke  discovered  that  a  local  dccrease  in  skin
                        resistarce could  be  produced  by  pressure,  electricity  or  heat
                        and he 2interpreted this  as  the  response  of  an  epithelial  cell
                        layer.  Several years later, Rein found that a-positive potential
                        response could be  produced  by  the  same  means.  This  phenomenon
                        su@gequently drew little  attention,  althou-h  it  was'confir,-,Ied
                        by                            It was reported to be obtained from
                        various parts of  the body but  n2ot  from  the  palms  or  soles,  a
                        firidino which su-aests that  sweat  &lands  are  not  involved  i-i
                        the process.  In  an  effort  to  facilitate  the  investigation  of
                        the pro@-4rties of the positive resoonse in the present research,
                        a method was devi@eed which  would  produce  a  fairly  reproducible
                        mecha.nical2 effect.  Electrical stimulation did not appear desirable
                        because of the numerous structures which it miaht activate.
                        Pressure was thou-ht undesirable because of the possible production
                        of  electrode  artifact.  The  mechanical  method  chosen   consists
                        of tapina to the volar surface of the fin-er a small ii@llatable
                        ba-.  The tape is applied to  the  lateral  sides  of  the  L'in-.er
                        such that inflation of the ba- to 190-@=  H-  exerts  a  stretch  on
                        the dorsal skin  under  the  electrode.  inflations  are  -iade  for
                        5 seconds at 30-second intervals and produce a squhre wave
                        stretch. The  response  consists  of  a  very  rapid  positive  seg-
                        ment fo'-lowed by a more2 gradually increasinp, sec@-ient  (Fig.  7).
                        In this recording, as  in all others, two sites on separate
                        fingers  are  subjected  to  the  strecch  stimulus.  A  third  site
                        on another unstimulated fin@er  is  used  to  monitor  any  response
                        of refle-.K origin.  The  local  responses  (L)  resemble  the  res-
                        ponses co word association2 (14)  in  general  form,  and  amplitude,
                        but are not present  on  the  non-stimulated  cont-rol  fincer  (C).
                                                                                 0
                            Alt'@iough the response is relatively stable, J4.t varies  w4-th
                        the staze  of  background  activity  of,neural  ori:gin.  In  Figure
                        8, the enhancement  of  the  response  by  ne-ative  skin  potential
                        aczivity is  illustrated  during  the  response  to  a  sniff.  This
                        potentiation is tv
                                          ,pical and has been reproduced  -.iur-erous  times
                        on 12 sjbjects.
                            The local  potential  response  (LFR)  has  also  been  obtained
                        from th2e volar surface of the finaer, despite Ebbecke's
                        statement to the contrary, possibly because he did not use
                        stretch. Its  amplitude,  however,  is  less  thar.  that  from  the
                        dorsal surface.  No local conductance responses were obtainable
                        from th-e volar surface, thou*h they were readily obta;-nable from
                        the dors@.i-n.
                            The L6PR can also be produced by vascular en,,or-ament of the
                                                                           0  *
                        finaer, produced by the sudden inflation of  an  arterial  ';-nc,@er

                                                                           Amok
                                     J2 fiiv
            Fia. 7.  CoTnparison of local potential response (L?R) and central SPR to
                                                 trace:  L = local Sti..LIUIUS (stretch);
            a word association stimulus.  Upper
            W = word association stimulus.  Tra1ces labelled L show r--cordina, fro-,n
            fingers fitted wir-h stretch device.  Trace labelled C is a control fin&er
            which responds to central neural activity only.

                                                                             t
                                    12 Wtv
              Fig. 8,  Increase of LPR amplitude produced by backeround ne-ative activity
                                                                 0        a
              of neural origin.  The ne-ative activity has been proiuced by havina the
               subject sniff sharply at point 'IS" on 7the upper trace.

                                                                                   7
                     cuff. Because of the relatively lar-O  area  enconoassed  by
                     the cuff and the small finger volume distal to it, tl--, vessels
                     of the distal portion are markedly  on-oroed.  The  resulting
                     LPR is cor-sidered to be caused by stretching of the skin  by
                     this proces2s.  If prior to cuff inflation the hand is elevated
                     to head level to eiipcy the veins, inflation of the  cuff  produces
                     little or no LPR.
                        Exsan-uination of the fin-er for 15 -,iinutes, produced by
                     rolling.a ti-ht rubber doughnut from tip to base of the fin-er,
                     potentiates the LPR by about 20 percent  (14  subjects).  The
                 2    positive skin potential response of central origin  (SPR)  is
                     simultaneously depressed, sometimes to less than 25 percent of
                     control. If the positive LPR and the positive  SPR  are  re-
                     flectio@ns of the activity of the same end oro.an, this must
                     indicate that hypoxia exerts its effect on the nerve endin(,s@
                     rather than on the effector or,.,an.  Ebbecke, in fact, reported
                     elicitin- the local conductance response (LCF,) from  day-old
                     cadavers.
                        The e%.sanauination data sua-est that the LPR  is  not  produced
                     by a vascular mechanism.  Added evidence is seen in the fact
                     that the LPR like the SPR is suscepti-ble to the effects  of
                     locally applied electrolytes such as ll.J AIC'3, ILX -Na2SO4, or
                     5M NaCl. An exa-nple of this effect is seen in Fi-.ure 9,  in
                     which 1N NaZS04 causes reversal of the rapid portion  of  the
                     response but not of tne secondary slower portion.  This efl.ect
                     is reversed when the fincer is returned to 0.1 @NaCl solution.
                 2    The effect of IN AIC13 is rather variable,  althouch  clearly
                     present. At tines it attenuates the LPR; at  other  times  it
                     potentiates it. A solution of SM  NaCl  produced  a  marked  poten-
                     tiation (e.g., 100 percent) of both phases of  the  response  which
                     was readily reversed by O.IN iN'aCl.  1-7ork with this acent lias
                     ju2st corimenced and the inter-subject variability  of  this  effect
                     is as yet unknown.
                         The rapid and slow components of this local response are
                     considered to ori-inate in sepnrate processes since they
                     occasionally dissociate as in the case of the results of ec-
                     posure to l@Ta2SO4, An occasional subject will  show  inversion  of
                     the rapid2 phase, with a normal  positive  slow  phase.  Because  of
                     the rapidity of the first phase and its negligible latency, it
                     is possible that it reflects the direct effect of  stretch  on  the
                     horny layer.  Earlier unpublished data from this laboratory shows
                     that a collodion membrane when transiently stretched manifests
                     a sharp alteration in the diffusion  potential  established  across
        1             it. The horny layer possibly behaves  in  a  similar  fashi-on.  If
                     this is so, however, one would h-,ve great difficulty in e%plaining
                     the auarientatioa of this response im-,-,ied4-ately after ne-ati%le

                                                                         Adak
                     VP
                     activity of central ori-in. tiorcover, a si,,iiiar pattern of
                                          0
                     fast and slow components is produced when the site is com-
                     pressed rather than stretched.  in this'procedure a standard
                     finger cuff is inflated over the ele2ctrode site.  To test for
                     whether the effect was due to electrode artifact, the experi-
                     nient was repeated in solution with the electrode at some dis-
                     tance froir- the fin-er.  In three subjects thus tested, the
                     typical iiave-form described for the stretch method persisted.
                     It is theiefore concluded that both the fast and slow coaponents
 2                    represent activities of two different viable membranes
                     accessible to the surface, both sensitive to mechanical sti:,-u-
                     lation but either located at different points or having different
                     electrochemical characteristics.
                     6.  Vascular Effects and SPR:
                        in the first phases of the present investication a series
                     of experiments w2as undertaken to deter-.iine whether a vascular
                     component was involved in the skin potential response.  Earlier
                     work by Darrow a@nd by Lader and @lontac--u had esteolished that
                                                                 ppreciable portion
                     vasomotor activity di'u riot account Lor any a
                     of the skin conductance response, but these authors did not
      2               investi-ate the riiat-ion to p2L.S@   ef@-Fects.  Vascular chan-es
                     were induced by venous and arterial occlusion, by means of pressure
                     cuffs.  Venous ena,oraer,)enc is knot-in to produce a cor.-@pensatory
                     increase in venous tone.  Arterial occlusion produces a reactive
                     hyperemia involvin- arteriolar dilation.  Local co2ld causes a
                     reflex vasoconstriction.  If any of these local effects are
                     acco,npanied by a local potential chan-e recordable on the skin
                     surface, one must face the possibility that these may be present
                     in the SPR.
                         Initial experi@nents were accomplished with venous occlusion
                     (20 to 60 mm Hg).  The cuff was placed on the arm with the
    2                 reference electrode on the central side of it.  The experi:-ental
                     site was on the volar surface of the middle secrrent of the finger.
                     A site on the opposite hand was used to -,%onitor central re&llex
                     effects incidental to the occlusive procedure.  Out of a total
                     of 69 oqc lusions on 7 subjects, 48 showed a negative local res-
                     ponse of up to2 3.7mv (average 1.2-,nv).  In later experiments,
                     however  a'fin-er cuff was substituted for the -arn-cuff and the
                     response disappeared or in some cases was positive.  It was then
                     determined, by varying the proximity of the reference electrode
                     (outside the cuff) to the cuff, that the apparent local negative
                     responses from the fin*er were in fact 8local r)csitive resdonses
                     from the reference site, resulting from --@echanical cemorration
                     of the reference area by inflation of the cuff.
   40

                                                cl                     ci
                        ci
                                                 S04
                                                                        C,
                        ci
                                                                                                t
                         12 hly
                         ci
                2      c                           ci
                                  A
             Fig. 9.  Revers$l of the fast LPR component produced by I N Na,)SO4
             The reversibilitv bf the effect upon substitutinc, 0.1 N ',%'aci 'or t@e
                      s shown in the third p
             Na2SO4 i                          anel-  .@,,ccn; rol; 3, n-ie 'in5fl-or in
                            r              @:acl
                             otitr.,ie,i to
                                                   ----------&

                         Adih
                                                                                           9
                            In z-notlier series of experiments c.-:sanguipation o' the
                         finger vas accomplislied  by  ttic  method  already  described,  In
                         four subjects exsan-uination was ter,-.inaced suddcnly after
  2                       15  minules  by  cutting  the  constricting  toroid.  The  associated
                         potential  response  was  either  minimal  or  absenz.  Further  runs
                         of this nature  are  scheduled  as  are  simple  arterial  occlusions
                         of varying  durations.  At  present,  indications  are  that  vaso-
                         motor  responses  do  not  produce  appreciable  potential  chan-es
       2                  at the skin surface.
                         7.  Testing of the        @Hy-pothesis-.
                            Experiments by         ion the cat footpad ba-we  lead  bin,  to
                         postulate that the  eldEErodermal response can be explained
                         entirely by the effects of fillin- the  sweat  d-.icts  and  hydra-
                         tion of the corneuml, there being  no  necess2ity  to  consider  the
                         presence  of  an  active  membrane  in  explainin-  tne  electrical
                         effects, Although  at  first  -lance  an  assort-ient  of  observa-
                         tions leads one to reject such a hypothesis            has     been
                         successful in defendin- it from many points @'f'aitack.  To
                         iiivesti-ate the question as to tj',@2etner      lhydration    model
                         or a me,-,brane model can best explain  tl-@e  electroder-nal  res-
                         ponse, the followin- test was performed.
                            Two similar active sites were e-.@posed to constant    ' current
                         and constant  voltace  sources,  each  under  dry  and  wet  condi-
                         tions. The dry  condition  would  be  expected,2  on  the  basis  of
                               tnodal to  produce  a  lar-er  response  than  the  wet  con-
                         dition, whether a constant volta,:@,e  or  constant  c-arrent  source
                         is used.  The membrane model, because of the dead space (corneu-,a)
                         interposed between the electrode and the active -,ieriorane,
                         predicts that respons2es should be reduced by the dry state with
                         constan.-- volta-e  but  not  witn  constant  current.  Comparisons
                         were run with  dry  plate  electrodes  against  a  p-reparation  in
                         which t.-ie corneum was allowed to  hydrate  with  elect-rode  jelly.
                            Obse-cvations on three subjects @qere all consistent with the
                         membra2ne model  in  that  responses  were  considerably  hicher  with
                         constant current than with  constant  voltage  in  the  dry  state;
                         responses in the wet state  were  higher  than  in  the  dry  state
                         when constant  volta-e  was  used.  These  results  irply  the  exis-
                         tence of  an  inactive  resistance  between  the  surface  and  the
                         site of resistance changes.  Un2less the hydration changes
                         postulated byl       jtake place in the deeper layers of the
                         corneum, his m@o-del @nust be recarded  as  inconsistent  with  the
                         results of these observations.
                         8.  liodel of Peripheral Electrodernal Process:
                             The above fi-ndi-i-s have been co,-,bined @@ith pre%,iovsly '"-now-,i

                                                                                        10
                      data to devise a model wliicii best C%'Plains the  total  obsc--va-
                      tions.  It  rests  on  sevcral  tentative  conclusicns  drawn  from
                      available evidence, namely:
                          a. Vascular effects  probably  play  a  neglicible  role  in
                                 2                                      0
                          accounting directly  for  either  conduccance_<)r  potential
                          responses.
                          b. A  negatively  char-ed  membrane  accessible  to  surface
                          solutions is responsible  for  the  jet-like  potential  and
                          conductance responses  which  recover  rapidly  and  completely
                          following neural discharge.  This membrane is lar-ely
                          responsible for  the  positive  potential  response  comoonent,
                          but can produce a short initial negative component when the
                          membrane breakdown process  is  slowed.  It  can  also  produce
                          a ne-ative overshoot.  The conductance change associated with
                          this process is of the rapidly recovering tv
                                              2                           pe.  This   mem-
                          brane is tentatively regarded as identical vith that respon-
                          sible for the LPR and is thouoht  to  be  located  in  an  epi-
                          dermal layer rather than in the sweat -land or duct.
                          Activity of this membrane is  considered  to  be  associated
                          with -reabsorption of moisture from the corneum.
                          2C.  Secretion of the sweat aland is not attended by
                          appreciable conductaTIce or potential effects but the f-;-llina,
                          of the duct produces a reduction in resistance and a ne-ative
                          shift in surf@ce potential d,je to  reduction  in  aenerator
                          inter-ial resistance. The  sweat  diffuses  laterally  ou-,  of
                          the duct into the 2corneum where it is  absorbed  at  a  rate
                          indicated by the intensity of positive activity.  If
                          absorption is slow, the  associated  resistance  and  potential
                          changes may persist, resultina  in  a  slow  rate  of  recovery
                          as seen in the first uaves of fiaure 10.
                                                           0
                B. A New Approach to the Analysis  of  2the  Skin  Condu.::tance  Response
                     The manner in which  the  @'ast-recovering  membrane  cotponent  and
                the slow-recovering sweat  component  are  thouaht  to  combine  to  pro-
                duce various forms of potential and conductance wave forms is
                illustrated by the recordina in  fiaure  10  and  by  the  schematic  ad&
                ition in figure 11.  From figure 11 it is seen tha2t a @-.ieasure of the
                relative sweat and  membrane  activity  may  be  obtained  by  inspection
                of the recovery limb, namely by observing the point at which the
                curve breaks and noting the elevation of the gentler slope above
                starting level.  in practice, these two processes are frequently
                partially fused so that the overall  recovery  rate  may  serve  only  as
                a rou-h inde.N of the relat6ive  sweatin-  and  absorption  rates.  The
                recovery of the fast conductance component appears tc be exponential,
                in which case the ci-,-qe required for 50 percept recovery  should  be

                                                                                                                       rT
                                                                              0                                        n0)"
                                                                              rr                                       0rt -d0
                                                                              :;r                     (D               @:V (4
                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                       0-1
                                                                                                                       t-h j--.
                                      2                                                                                 n
                                                                              0                                        rr P,. In
                                                                              (D                                       =r E3 :r
                                                                              en                                       fD0U'0n
                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                       (D m 000
                                                                                                                       rT il)H
                                                                                2                                       (:71 n fT H.
                                                                                                                       t') (A
                                                                                                                       0tip0
                                                                                                                       M(D0
                                2                                                                                       fD00ra                 
cr
                                                                                                                       :3 @3 =v rt cn
                                                                          2                                             ry-v) H, 7v
                                                                                                                       to0
                                                                                                                       CT
                                                                                                                       m00
                                              2                                                                         cr, 'I 1-h rr
                                                                                                                       tn ct :3
                                                                                                                       -, =r CT
                                                                                                                  2     (D H.mH.
                                                                                                                       00I... lb
                                                                                                                       tom
                                                                                                                       m00
                                                                                                2                       CT rt
                                                                                                                       W. Su"
                                                                                                                       pi 2)
                                                                                                                       CT0H
                                                                                        2                               ub 09
                                                                                                                       tn r-I
                                                                                                                       mfD c:
                                                                                                                       0C6 CD (D
                                        2                                                                               CT t@.
                                                                                                                       :r CD ct ri
                                                                                                                       ct @4 at
                                                                                                                       m
  2                                                                                                                     LO
                                                                                                                       cr
                                                                                                                       ta
                                                                                                                       rt
        2                                                                                                               fv0fu 113
                                                                                                                       n:r"
                                                                                                                       @-tt0
                                                                                              2                         pi P,.0
                                                                                                                       fi@mPt :3
                                                                                                                       P. to to 0.
                                                                                                                       CT r_
                                                      2                                                                 rt CT
                                                                                                                       fA :3,
                                                                                                                       m(D

                             s 'IV
                         SPR
                            POTENTIAL                               CON-DLfc-T-ANCE
             Fig. 11,   5c@le."4tic presentation of the relation of the separate POsitive
             and ne.*ative potential co-,nponents to conductance chances and of the -,qanner
             in which they combine.  S n 9sweat; @l m me.-ibrane effecor.

                      independent of amplitude.  The recovery half-time would be prolonged
                      in  accordance  with  the  amount  of  sweatin-  in   the   response.   Thus,
                      recovery half-time (t/2) should, as a first appro.-cinationip constitut!3
                      a useful measure of  the  relative  r,-c-,ibrane  and  sweat  activity  of  a
                      wave.
               2       C.  Behavioral Studies
                          1.  Theoretical Approach:,
                              During  a  co,-nprehensive  exp.loration  of  the   cat-brain   while
                          recordin- from the foot-pad,                               lsliowed  that
                          positive or ne-ative responsi"s-could be obtaine              cortical
                          stimulation, but that only ne,,ative r2esponses could        be   elicited
                          by sti-Lnulat4-on of the hypothalamus.    The  positive   waves   were
                          obtaine-d  by  stimulation  of  the  prenotor  cortex  (Brod,-,iann  Area
                          117),  an  area  responsible  for  fine   motor   coordination.   Lesions
                          in this area cause loss of motor inhibitory restraint and
                          pro2duce forced -rasping.  If a monkey with such a lesion
                          (bf-lateral) lies on its  side,  the  A'orced  c.,rasping  is  relaxed  on
                          the  downward  side,  indicating  that  another  inl,.ibitory   influence
                          has tal@an over, perhaps nediated by the vestibular and cerebellar
                          control  mechanisms.  Interestin-ly,  a  hu-@nan   subject   with   elec-
 2                         trodes  on  each  hand  shows  a  depression  of  the  positive  SPR   on
                          the do@4nward  side  when  he  lies  on  his  side.  This  is  su--astive
                          of the -@elation of  positive  activity  to  fine  -rootor  coorcinaticn.
                          It is hy-pothesized that the pre-motor area functions in the
                          fine  adjustnent  of  the2  moisture  content  of   the   skin   necessary
                          for  man;-oulative  behavior.  The  positive   wave,   shown   earlier
                          to be associated with tqater-reabsorption, is seen as an indicacor
                          of this rea.ulatory process and therefore of a set for -,oal-
                          directed manipulative behavior.  Electrodermal activity of
                          hypotha'-a-.,7ic origin on the other hand, tied as i-t is to tne
                          limbic  system,  is  (in  the  absence  of  the--more-ilatory  de.-nands)
                          more  in<licative  of.an  emotional  response  associated   with   paimar
                          and  plantar  sweating.  In  the  li*ht'of  the  -,necianical  resistan@e
                          to  abrasion  afforded  the  skin  b2y  hi,h  levels  of  hydration,  this
                          is considered to be a protective manevver.  While,,,     !weating     may
                          be produced by stimulation of the pre-notor cor!:ex,,tvpe of
                          sweatin-.  is  viewed  as  delicately  re-ulatin-  the  moisture  con-
                          tent of the pal-,car and plantar corneum and is likely to be
                   2       accompanied  by  evidence  of  the   reabsorption   process   rianifested
                          by positive activity.    %Ton-ther,-,,orea.ulatory activity of
                          hypothalamic origin is viewed as :. primarily protective and
                          would nct likely be ac,ompanied by the reabsorption process;
                          it  should  therefore  not  show  the   positive   component.   Obviously
           2               this  approach  -nust  represent  a  cross  oversimplification   of   the
                          control process, whicl-t  includes  inhibitory  as  tiell  as  facila-
                          tory in@luences fro,-n  many  other  parts  of  the  brain,  includina
                          he e,.:tra-pyra7.idal system and limbic structures.  However-        C
                          t
                          doe2s establ4-sh a  rationale  for  ratin-  responses  along  a  di,-..en-
                                                                  o
                          Sion from primarily defense reactions to primarill,@o-oal-
                          directece preparations.    Fxther, it elabor--tes a bencvioral

                                                                                             12
                        model wliich may be  wei-hed  a-ainst  future  findings  and  modified
                        as dictated  by  the  facts.  The  quantitative  data  for  evaluating
                        responses would  be  obtained  from  analysis  of  either  the  poten-
                        tial  response  or  the  conductance  response,  but  because  2of  che
                        greater  number  of  complicating  factors  in  the  analysis  of  the
                        SPR, the conductance response  has  been  chosen  for  first  examina-
                        tion.  The recovery half-time (t/2) has specif-'-cally been
                        utilize4@ for this measltre.
                        2.  Application  Demonstratina  Specificity  of  Individual   Stimuli:
          2                  In an earlier study it wa's shown  that  there  is  a  qualitative
                        difference  between  the  electrodermal  response  co   the   alerting
                        sional-for a  forthcomina  task  and  to  the  subsequent  signal  for
                        execution  of  the  task.  This  difference  which  @ias   independent
                        of absolute a-,nplitude was seen as  a.change  in  the  ratio  of  the
  2                      a.nplitudes of the paimar and dorsal finger res-.)onse.  This ratio,
                            increases  with  relative  "sweatiness"  of  a  response   because
                        of the -,iarked difference in  stqeat  -land  concentration  from  the
                        two areas. Although this  nethod  produced  a  de-.ionstrable  separa-
                        tion of responses,  it  was  relatively  insen2sitive  and  subject  to
                        numerous complications.  Further, it did not lend itself
                        readily to  on-line  automatic  analysis.  The  recovery  half-tir,-@e
                              e
                        .ieasur was applied  to  some  of  these  saci!@  data.  It  was  con-
                        siderably  more  sensitive  in  ter-,is  of  the  perce-nt  difference
                        betweer.2 the responses  to  the  al,erting  and  e@.ec-ution  si,,nal,
                        despite the  fact  that  it  utilized  only  a  single  site.  A  com-
                        parisop of the  two  measures  for  alettina  and  executi-On  sionals
                        in a simple perceptual task and in a reaction time task is
                        given i-i table 1.  For  'this  subject  the  t/2  rieasure  was   much
        2                more  consistent  and  rnore  discriminatina  than  F/D  in  the  per-
                        ceptual  task.  In  the  reaction  time  task,  altbou&h   it   showed
                        lar-er  differences  between  the  two  types  of  response,  it   was
                        not as  -@onsistent  as  was  the  F/D  measure.  out  bf  7  subjects
                        tested in  a  similar  fashion  to  date,  6  showed 2 t/2  to  have  a
                        discriminative  power  equal  to  or  better  than  the  P/D  -easure.
                        3.  Application to Discernment of Situational Differences:
                            in  another  ty-pe  of  experiment  the  measurement  of  recovery
                        half-time was  applied  to  the  separation  of  two  states  of  pro-
                        Ion-ed activity,  namely  rest  and  task  performance  in  an  ef2fort
                                               a shift in state  of  activation  would  be  in
                        to determine i.;hether
                        evidence even when  no  change  in  amplitude  of  response  occurred.
                        The two situations  were  (1)  relaxing  in  a  seated  posture,  eyes
                        open, atqaitina the start  of  the  task  instruction,  (2)  er,-a-ing
                                   2   0                                              o      @,
                        in an ag*ressive  task.  This  task  consisted  o-@  callin-  aloud  a
                        series of numbers  from  I  to  10  which  the  experi-,nenter  @@culd
                        atte-,ipt to guess, the purpose bein-  to  allow  r--he  e.%perimenter
                        the fpupst nu,-.iber8 of correct -uesses.  The last three relatively
                        pure waves of the rest  condition  were  chosen  Llor  araivs4-s.  The

                                       Table 1.  Comt)arison of P/D and t/2 measures in
                                       differentiating   the  responses   to   the   alerting   and
                                       execution signals for a perceptual task and a reaction
                                       time   task   administered   in    mixed    random    order.
                 PERCEPTUAL
                                       P/D      Rat2io                                 t/2      (seconds)
                  Trial           Alerting  executio-,i  % cliange                A!erting     Execution"        change
                       1               1.16         1.09            -6                23          8.0            -63
                       2               .86          1.00            +16               9.0         4.3            -50
        2               3               1 00         1.00            0                 @7.5        4.5            -40
                       4               :so          1.03            +29               6.0         4.0            -33
                       3               1            1.00            -11               5.0         4.0            -20
                       6.              .04          .90            2 -13               8.0         1.0             37
                       7               1.04         1.00            .4                9.0         4.5            -30
                       8       1       .88   1      1.00            +14               s.o         s.o             0
                                                     Median        -2                               Median       -38
       2                                                          N.S.                                   P      <.03
                REACTION            TIME
                                       F/D      Ratio                                 t/2      (seconds)
                  Trial           Alerting  execution   Tochange                 Alerting     Execution          change
                       I               .94          .89             .5              2  11.5        4  ;')         .61
                       2               1.00         1.00            0                 3.0         8'0            +167
                       3               1.07         ..89            -17               15.0        4.0             73
                       4               1.14         .97             -13               8.0         4.0            --50
                       5               .95          .85             -11               10.5        4.5            -57
                       6               1.23         .93             .24               13.0        -0.0           -62
                       7
                                       .95          .87             .8                6.0         3.0            -50
          2             8               1. 5c.       1.06            -39               5.0         6.5            +30
                       9               I.QC         .89             -11               4.5           13.5         +200
                       10              1.35         1.02            .24               8.0         6.0            -30
                                                    ,Median   9   --13                               imedian      -50
                                                        p   /1    .01                                   P < .20

                           Table 2, Comparison of average va'@ues of recovery
                           half-time (t/2) for resting state and aggressive
                           guessing game task in 12 subjects.
                                            t/2 (seconds)
           Subject                    Rest ng               Task                Change
               1                         6.7                5.6                   -i6
               2 2                        5.0                3.6                   -28
               3                         4.9                3.1                   -33
               4                         5.7                3.1                   -46
               5                         5.3                2.9                   -45
               6                         7.5                2.8                   -63
               7                 2        3.6                3,i                   -14
               8                         10.0               5.0                   -30
               9                         3.9                3.2                   -22
               10                        3.9                2.9                   -26
               11                        2.2                1.7                   -23
               12                    1    8.1                3.1                   -63
                                                                      ,Median     -30
                                                                         p 4   .001

                                                                                             13
                          first three waves during the t:asl% period t..,Iiich matched  these
                          in             were chosen for the co,-,,parison.  Results  for  the
                          12           are shown in table 2.  All 12 showed the same results,
                          namely  a shortenin- of th2e recovery  half-ti-.ac  during  the  task
                          period (Fig. 12).  According to the theoretical framework under-
                          lying the analytic approach, this would i,-.dicate that the r.-.oisture-
                          regulating  mechanism,  supposedly  activated   fDr   goal-directed
                          manipulative behav-@'or, was mobilized durin- the task ti2hich
                          included the use  of  a  push  button  sianal  by  the  subject.  How-
                          ever, similar results  were  obtained  even  when  no  push  button
                          procedure was included.  This sugoests an extension of tlis
                          motor preparation to problem-solvina situations in acneral,
                          even thouoh the manipulation may be only symdolic.
                I2ll.  Conclusions
                      Because of the  relative  simplicity  and  high  sensitivity  of  the  t/2
                measure, it should  lend  itself  well  to  automation.  It  is  altost,  but
                not entirely, independent of  response  a-,nolitude  and  tius  constitutes  a
                ,neasure of the quality of  response  which  is  relatively  free  of  the  pro-
                blem of assessing overall  activation  l2evel  of  the  electroder.-.ial  system.
                It apparently can d4-fferentiate  between  behavioral  shifts  o-A@-  relatively
                lon- duration, as well as  between  the  rapid  sni-fts  asaociated  wi-h  two
                successive brief sti-,iuli of different qualitative -@neanin-.  Future eftorts
                will be concerr;ed with investizatin2- its sensitivity =o various subjective
                states, especially the defense reaction and  to  deter.-.iining-whet'ner  it  is
                affected by chances in base level.  At the same time efforts will be rtede
                to devise a system for automating extraction of this weasure.
                     The pieces necessary to construct a faithful model of the peripheral
                electrodermal effector system 2are c,---adually falli,-I& into place.    ?'c i,
                most promising areas for further study of this system include r,,.icro-
                electrode expeii@-nents, observations on the locally induced resoonse,
                studies on the ef."Lects of  various  solutions,applied  to  the  skin  surface,
                and  studies  on  the  reabsorption  process.  These  are  presently   occup8ying
                a n@ajor part of t,ie laboratory effort and  will  continue  to  do  so  for  an
                appreciable period.

                                                    R [I'S T
                                                                          CAL
                                                   TASK
                         START
                                                   R E71 T
                                 T12
                      Samples of conductance tracin-,S'from a subject at rest and en-
           gac,,ed in an agoaressive guessing gar,-@e, shosiing the change in the recovery
           lir,ib responsible for the shortening of the recovery half-ti.-e (t/2).

