                                                                            25 Fabruary 1952
                                               Interview With..
                          1.  On Thursday, 21 February 1952, the  writer had  an extenfled
                     interview wi
                                 The conversation lasted from 3100 PM to approximately
                      :30 PM.  The interview was laid on through the Contact Branch and2
                     introductions were made through,                the Now York  City  Con
              0;4  ,.tact Office.  No..difficultila@,,w re encountered in this matter*
                          2.                 s a professional hypnotist of exceptionally
                      ood re tation. He apparently has other  means  and  has  been  a  pro-
                     9
                     fessional engineer and accountant.  His apartment is in a deluxe
2                     apartment nei hborhood ir@.               and is in exceptionally good
                     taste*                resides there with  his sister*                           L
                          3.                is about six'feet  tall, wears horn-rim glasses,"."-
                     haa a a ong, agressive look,  and,  physically,  is  quite  impressive.
                     He appears highly intelligent, was court2eous, amiablep and co-opera-
                       ve       h  t.  Elefore getting to cases, the writer fenced with
                                    or approximately three-quarters of an hour, talking
                     generally about hypnosis and not disclosing  ositive security interests.
                     After establishing in the writer's mind that              as  competent
                     and thoroughly understood the meaning of soc
         2                                                          recy, the  writer  opened
                      p and discussed positive matters.  Set out below are a series of
                     u
                     questions and answers which cover, in substancep  the  details  of  the
                     interview wit)
                          Qt   What are  your experiences in general with hypnotism?
                          A:   I have been  aprofessional hypnotist  for at2 least 15  years.
                               At present,  Iam employed on a  ver  confidential  basis  two
                               davs a week workin  in t
                                                                                work cons      y
                               I  wor a3
                                             and I work continuously with all   types of
                                    n s  a             I am not teaching hypnoti3sm now,
                               but I  have taught many individuals hypnotism in the past.
                                                          -id hypnotism'play in the
                          Q:   What part,  do you think, d
                                               and other show trials by @he USSR   @Lnd their
                               satell   as
                          Ai   In my persoirial opinio        is possibly  combined with

                                dureq.,3, and possibly drugs, is how the "confes,,3ion3l' were
                                brouglit about. I have long  been  interested  in  these  trials
                                and I believe it entirely possible to bring these things
                                about through these techniques.  It  would  take  a  great  deal
                                of continuous application 2and study of the individual to
                                produce these results but the enemy  has  plenty  of  time  and
                                is capable of using any methods.
                           Q:   Can you obtain information from an individual, willing or
                                unwilling, by hypnotism?
                                                  Many of the medical   cases I work on   are
                                -Definitely, yes.
           2                A:
                                involved in obtaining personal,intimate information and
                                through hypnotismp I have been quite successful in obtaining
                                this.  If an individual refuses to co-operate with hypnosis,
                                the doctors with whom I work use drugs., always sodium amytal.
                              Q:, Do you think that this  system  would  be  useful  in  obtain2ing
                                information from a recalcitrant, obstinate, and entirely
                                unco-operative individual?
                           At"',Yes,,'definitely.' That is the only way   to approach  this'',@
                                type of individual, but even at that you would have to
                                study your  individual  psychologically  and  the  matter  would
                                2requirt- great skill.  All people have   to  be  approached  in
                                different manners as far as hypnotism    goes, but If you
                                could gain their confidence  or  at  least  indicate  so,  they
                                would clearly- understand you were not   hostile  to  them  and
                                your battle would be more than half won4,''                               -,@K
                    2            How far do you think individuals    could be  controlled by
                                hypnosis?
                               A: 'Ihis Is a v-ery difficult subject.  Post-hypnotics will
                                last twenty years and will be very strong If re-enforced
                                from time to time4  tlowevero  if  direct  control  is  wantedp
                                and particularly without re-enforcement2, perhaps twelve
                                                                               d even then  a
                                hours would be the most you could expect aii
                                possibility exists that the person under hypnosis might
                                suddenly be awakened-by some external st:Lmulus.
                            Q:  Have you ever had any experience with drugs?
                            A   Yes, many  times.  I  h0ave  worked  with  doctors  using  sodium,
                                amytal and pentothal and have obtained hypnotic control
                                                     -2-

 4
                                after the drugs were used.  In factj many    times the drugs
                                                         o of obtaining hypnotic control.
                                were used for the purpos
                                                                               "new" drugs or
                                Wt-re .iny other drugs used?  Do you know any
                                are there any "wonder" drugs tha2t can be used in this busi-
                                nes3?
                          A:    I-To.  I have known doctors to try other drugs but they do
                                not liave any success .ind almost without exception in my,
                                  k, sodium amytal and pentothal are the weapons used.
                                wor
                                If I had to tackle a case, tough and urriilling, I would
   2                             rely on.sodium amytal.  I do not know of any "wonder"
                                drugs. 'I do not believe they exist and none of the psy-
                                chiatriets and doctors I work with use anything but those
                                I have mentioned.
                          Q:    Have you ever heard of hypnosis being used in connection
                                with electroshock?
                          Ai2   -No4  I am familiar with the electroshock convulsion and                   -p
                                coma but I have never attempted to obtain hypnotic con-
                         .@:"-.,,trol thereafter and have  never  heard  of  anyone  doing  this,
                                However, some of my friends who are psychiatrists con-
                                             electroshock and I have complete access to
                                ste.ntly  use
                                their   work. I shall make some experiments along these
                                lines In the near future and when I see you again,, ,le
                                will discuss the results of this,
                                Are there any individuals   you might know who would be
   V                            worthwhile in contacting along these lin2es?
                           At   Offhand  I cannot think of    anyo e excedt
                                            erhaps 'one of the o  standin@
                                                                                 d is well  ae-
                                the country, thoroii!,,hly iinderstandg drugs an
                                quainted with my work.  As far as liypnotists are concerned,
                   2             I do iiot believe there are five comlietent professional
                                hypnotists in the Ui  S.  today  and  I  have  nothing  but  con-
                                tempt for  the  colleg-3  professor  who  talks  about  hypnosis.
                                Only the professional who can  liandll-  liypnosis  in  front  of
                                the public nnd on a large 3calp     is ca7pable of really giving
                                             advice or information on hy,)notic work.
                                first-rate
                                Wo      ou  be willing to act   as a consultant to this Agency?
                                             as fully informed that the writer was making no

                                offers and in  no  positlon  to  recruit  personiiel.  This  offer
                                was being made in general terms.)
                          At    le55 I feel that we are at war and if I  can  be  of  any  help
                                whatsoever, I shall be glad to give my time.  If you need
                                me on any given case, I will be glad to come.
                          Qi  2  Would you rccept, puoils for private coaching?
                                (Same explanation a3 xbove.)
                          A:    Yes. I think I could train  ;m  Individual  or  at  least  give
                                him a  substantial  background.in.two  weeks,,  working,out  with
                                him three timis a week.
                          Qi    Do you have any Ideas  that hypnotism coul2d be used as a
                                weapon?
                          A:    Yes, I have thought about   this  often.  It  could   certainly
                                be used  in  obtaining  infornation  from  recelcitrant  people
                                particularly with d
                                                    rugs 6  Furthermorep it can be used as
                                a morale factor and in addition,  it  could  be  used  as  a  2ra-
                                cruitin(?, source for-i3pecial ty-,ocs of work-. I  will  explain
                                the lant two.  You have large D.P. camps in Europe and Asia.
                                You have to entertpin these p@,ople.  A good professional
                                hypnotist is a goo(i entertainei,.  Using ma.ss hypnotic methodsp
                              2  he could driw home thoughts that iiould be of great benefit
                                to our side.  Individuals that ti-:? rained coritrol of through
                                hypnotic influence could le  conv,-,rted  to  sti-ong  supporters
                                                                         The  opposite  of   this
                                0  ou
                                f    r viewpoint2 through suggestion.
                                of course, would hold true.  Furtheremore, along these lines
                                a good hypnotist  running  hypnotic  sliows  for  entertainment
                                   ld plck up a great  many  subjects,  oome  of  whom  might  be
                                wou
                                exceptionally  good  subjects  for  us.  These  subjects  could
                                e2asily be tabbed and put to our use.
                           Q:   Have 3,oi gver 'c,c@.-n able to produce hypnosis witliout an  in-
                                dividualln knowledge?
                           At   Yes, through the  relaxing  technique  and  on  rare  occasions
                                -"n able to prodtice hy-,nnotisni aL@.ii-nst a p-,nr:son's will.
           9                     flowevtr, you cannot count on t.hL:, and  to  attempt  to  attack
                                an individual who did not want to be hypnotized alone would
                                be almoqt an impossible task.  In     t-hat type of case, I would
                                 se sodium amytal and/or sodium pentothal.
                                u

                       Q:     Do you have any special techniques that you think are
                              valuable?
                       At'    AU techniques are valuable. I use  about  eighteen  dif-
                              ferent approaches to individuals ranging from fear to
                              anxiety, to deception, etc., etc. All individuals  are
                              different and a hypnotist always studies his subjects
                              2carefullys psychologically and otherwise, before attempting
                              hypnosis with them.  Only skilled professional hypnotists
                              have proper training and work at it often enough to be
                              skilled hypnotists. I would be glad to show you all  my
                              techniques when we have time to discuss them.
                              There is a peculiar and somewhat dangerous technique in-
               2               volving pressure on the carotid artery.  Thg  technique
                              of using pressure on this artery Is largely a matter of
                              timing. Pressure in the right place cuts off the  flow
                                                                          apid  coma-
                              of blood to the brain, apparently causing R r
                              like condition -- during this condition, hypnotic cont2rol
                              can sometimes be obtained.  The technique is not easy to
                              learn.  I have tried It only a few times but it has been
                              successful.
                        Q:    How effective are post-hypnotics; over  what  distances and
                              time can they be effective?
                        At    Properly used post-bypnotics will last twenty  years. They
                                         2                -y re-enforcement from time to
                              can be made more effective b
                                    Post-hypnotics are not affected at all  by  time or
                              travel or distance away from the person who placed  the post
                              hypnotic. As a rule, post-hypnotics should be  100%  effective
                              in good subjects and they would certainly be more effective
              2                than a person operating under direct hypnotic  control, since
                              a person in a hypnotic trance can suddenly be brought out of
                              it for various reasons,particularly after many hours,while
                              a post-hypnotic will always remain strong,
                             Q: Can individuals be made to do things under hypnosis that
                              they would not do otherwise?
                    2         A: 7his is a nuchly, debated subject and, in my opinion, as a
                              general rule, no individual will do anything against his moral
                              code or upbringing under a hypnotic trance they would  not  do
                              otherwise.  llowev-3r., It should be remembered that by the pro-
                              per type of conditioning and a very intelligent and understan7ding
                              approach using psychology, individuals could be taught  to  do
                                                                         This would be  diff
                              any                                                          I-
                                 thing including murderp suicide, etc,
                              cult, but I believe it could be done by a careful  process  of

                                conditioning a per3onrnycliologically while under a hypnotic
                                state, setting a Stage for the act as it were.  I do not have
                                much faith in test experiments In colleges because they are,
                                by their very nature, exp
                                                         eriments or tests.  I do belie2ve
                                that you could carry out acts that would be again3t an in-
                                dividiialls moral feelings if th3y were rightly, psychologi-
                                c@Llly coiiditioned.  Of coursr-, it iiould not be as -nuch of a
                                probl-@,ti to have an lrnoral pei-sori com-qlt an2 immoral act or
                                a murderer comit a murder, since by their nature they would
                                have no hesitancy to do such a thing in their normal life.
                                I do not kncrd of any drugs that would do this under any cir-
                                cumstances, but I do fee                        d other
                                                        1 that'the                       f a2mi.U &r
                                cases in which individuals confesood to criifies which they
                                could not have possibly corraitt,ed was 'brought about by h)-p-
                                                                             sychological con-
                                nosis, as I mentioned lefore, and lengthy p
                                ditioning.  The question itse3-fl of course, is one th;.it has
                                been debated a great many times t-,ut is difficult to actually
                                arrange a MI)racticall  test.
                           Qt   Do you have any special  techniques or ideas for detecting if.-@
                                an individual is under hypnosis or not?
                           A:   Yes@ I have sov-erhl mothod3 for dttecting this and if I see
                                you again, I wlll go over them in detail with you.  There
                                                                  ich I think are very effective.
                                are certain tests that I make wh
                                Along this same line, I also use several methods for detecting
                                when individuals are faking or play acting with me or feigning
          2                      :hypnosis
                               Q: Do you have any system   for detecting good hypnotic subjects,,
                                particularly   not along   the lines of stage antertai=ents7
                               A: No particular systent., but tlicrp are certain techniques that
                                I apply in looking for good subjects.  Most of these are
                        2        tasically standard tests   and are, undoubtedly, known to you.
                                (Reference was made to standard tests for suggestibility,
                                all known  to  the
                                                  writer.)  In this connection, when I see
                                you again, I will show you some of the methods I use along
                                these lines,
                            Qt  Can hypnosis I-,e broken by anot,lier hylinotist If specific
                                instructions liqve been given to a subject to premnt this'?
                            L:  I have been able to do this, but this i3 not easy and re-
                                quires a great   deal'of,tiAe,and effortj but'I believe that,

                                                                                                          ..... .......
                                   t,hit, lljqoot. sny liyin@-)t.ic coni-rol. enil be (lPtect,@(I aiid
                                   I)roicen if sufficient "L-Iii-in  aiid  R  careful  psychological
                    2               approach aro used.
                             Q:    Doe-n alcohol aggist   in the   obtainine of               in   a
                                   sul)ject?
                             A:    I do not belinve  it  helps.  Tlit--re  are  rftqtiy  other  more
                                   important aids tO IIYPTIOSIS  t2hnn  a  social  di-J.nk  or  t,,io.
                                   The  first  of  these  I  believe  would   be   anxiety,   another
                                   would  be  fear,  third  might  be   exhaustion.   llowever.,   in
                                   many cases, a                                                   a
                                                  loohol   does   make   individuals   more   pliabl
                            2       and In that sense might have some        resul.ts.
                             Q:    Do yuti have any material i.1i;it you    think iriight be of in-
                                   tei,est to me along ttiese linns?
                             At    Yes.  As  you  know,  an   individual   who   has   been   hypnotized
                                   makes a very excellent courier.         They c2an I)a given messages
                                   while under
                                                 hypnosis which they themselves do not lrnow and
                                   only  an  indi.vjdual  kno,,ting  th-3  code  can  get  this  message
                                   from this courier.      Even  assu5tinp_,  that  thg  post-hy-pnoti.c
                                   corit2-rol  could  be  brokeri  or  the  individual   hypnotized,   it
                                   could still be protected perhaps as follows:
                                         A  I)erson  could  be  regressed  to  a   certain   time
                                         and  date  and  then  given  the   message   and   unless
                                         the  person   who   subsequently   gained   control   of
                                2         the  subjee-t  regressed  the  subject   to   the   cor-
                                         rect date and time set outo he could not get
                                                   age.  Even  more  secure   would   be   to   move
                                         the mess
                                         the  individual  forwardi   If   he   were   moved   from
                                         thirty  years  of  age   to   thirty-five   years   of2
                                         age  at  a  given  date  and  time  and   then   given
                                         the  message,  unlosa   t-he   individual   could   guess
                                         the age, the time, and date in the future,           he
                                         could not obtain the message.
                                    In  my opinion, the use of this hypnotic technique is valu-
                                 2   able from your point of viewi  Certain it is that by hypnotic
                                    control  over  an   individual   you   can   extract   Information   pro-
                                    ba'rly l,etter than any other known way.  Furthermore, in good
                                    3ul)jects you can create complete arinl-slas -41iich ghould be
                                    helpful.    In addition, as I m2ntiotied atove, I thirik ttii!3
                                    technique c'ould be used on a mass scale as I  explained  both
                                    as a morale factor or for  propaganda  purposes.  Some  people
                                       the Army I kncfw'w-e giving thoufht to these iterms, but
                                    whether it can ever be sold at the top-level, I  cannot  say,,
   6                                 I think it     -dld be very valuable4
                                                 wo

                                                                                             - ------ - -----
                              I will try when I return from my trip to  contact a number
                              of individuals, psychiatrists, and doctors  that  I  know
                              and without discussing any reasons, obtain  from  them  any
                              information that they may have on new drugs or techniques.
     2                         I do not believe that there are any now drugs  and  I  do
                              not believe there is anything such as  the  'wonder"  drugs
                              which will produce instant talking when given to an indi-
                              vidual. I believe our hvvnotic  caoacities  are  as  good
                              as the                                 and I  also  believe
                              thstt  t""no  "wonder"  drugs  or  any  other  drugs   we
                              do not know about. The only thing  they  have  is  plenty
                              of time and they care nothing for normal conventions.
                              For matter of record                 rofessed  great  in-
                              tereat in this type    work  stating that in  his  opinion,
                              it had long been neglected by  our  Goverrment.  He  stated
     9                         he would contribute time and effort If he were called
                              upon to do so and volunteered to assist in  any  case  if
                              he were called upon for assistance.

