                                                                                     0
                                                                           A-Ink
                           Period Covered: June 15, 1966 to October 15, 1966
          1.  Experiiiiental
          Followin- is a brief synopsis of activities under tl-iis contract performed during the
                   0
          first four months. Details will appear in the s2ix-month report.
                  1. Animal experiments involved electrical stimulation of the plantar nerve
          ;In cats, while recording skin potential responses and conductance responses from
          the foot pad. Response at-nplitude @vas found to be stro-,igly potentiated by  increasing
          periods of rest between test series. This effect appears to be due to the state of
          resting hydration. It affect2s both potential response and conductance response and
          conductance response and may accounc for a 100 per cent difference in response
          amplitude.
                  2. Microelectrode studies were extended to observation of potential response
          from sweat gland pores and from epidermal sites along with simultaneous recordings
          from large sites witli conventional electrodes. The epidermal sites C.'ave primarily
          positive responses a2t the same time as   'the sweat pore and the gross site was
          producing ne,-j-ative responses. This finding was consistant wit:ti t-ie -hypothesis that
                       C)
          the positive responses are of epidermal origin and reflect a different type of biological
          adaptation than does te sweat gland activation.
                  3.  Further experiments were carried out on the nail bed -,o determine whether
          2these alleo-ed epidermal responses Nvere in fact only artifacts of nearby  skin  activity
          due to volume conduction. Strong positive potential responses were found to be easily
          el-'minated by puncture of the epidermis with the microelectrode used for the recording.
          Negative responses, if present, could not be so elii@inated.  The  possibility  that  the
          weak negative responses are of vascular origin is beinc, examined.  This2 effect would
          corlfound the interpretation of negative waves from the sweat gland at normal skin sites.
                  4.  Experiments to inveptigate the temperature effect on amplitude of the
          positive skin potential response have ber;n initiated. There is a potentiation of the
          positive wave with increasing  room  temperat,,ire  (these  induced  temperature  chanaes
          are not local as in previous experiments) indicating that the e2pidermal component
          (if this is the origin of the posi-tive wave) possibly serves a thermoregulatory function
          and is indicative of a covert preparation for motor activity. The negative wave,
          presumed to be of sweat gland origin, is not potentiated by increasing room temDera-,ure.
                                                                     Appro,ved for Relezsa
                                   0                                  Date    2 7,

                                                                                           2
           This is not surprisin- if tllc-.se sweat glaii:Js are noii-tliermoregulatory as
                                43
           claimed by Kuno and others.
                  5. A model, xelating potent@l,-l responses to conductance responses, has
           been developed, and --s serviny as a2 gruide to the direction of experiment@ition and
           interpretation of results. This rnodel, attributin- nec,,ative waves and the long
           lasting component of the conductance response to sweat -land activity and positive
           waves and the fast-recovering component of the conductance response to epidermal
           activity points to metliods for their separation. One mettiod involves analysis of
           the 2recovery slope of the skin resistance response. The other entails the use of
           high frequency impedance measurements in conjunction with copventional D.C.
           measurements of skin resistance. These measurements are now under test.
           11. Research facilities and perso  el
                                          procured under this contract has been delivered and is
           in operation. The laboratory for the animal work and microelectrode wor2k has been
           renovated and is also in operation. All @person-net en,-,aged in the research activities
           under this contract have been recruited and trained where necessary.

