         In view of your association with our work and actual participation in
         experiments, it would be appreciated if you would reduce to writing in
         detail the following items:
           1.  Do you,,now believe that the H techniquep coupled with the use
                  of certain chemicalsp ia an effective intelligence weapon?
           2.  Do you feel thatthe technique can t-@e improved?  How?
            3.    Have y2ou any additional ideas that would tend to improve our
                  techniques arid, ig..so, set them out in detail.
            4.    You felt in June of this year that 45-60 minutes was possibly
                  the longest time that good results could be obtained under the
                  chemical-H technique.  Coul!d this be extended?  For instance,
                  by continued conditioning of the subject or by repeating the
                  control every day, pe2rhaps twice a day?
            5.    Could we, after thorough conditioning, transfer by a given code
                  word or some designated means control to an experienced case
                  officer?  Would he then be able to continue successful questioning?
             6.   Since there is always a chance for some fantasy to enter into
                  talk under R, how can , we cut this to the absolute minimum?
             7.   Please set out in detail the best methods that y2ou can devise
                  for the obtaining of control of a subject, whether willing or
                  not, using the chemical-H method?
             8.   Do you believe thatyou could detect through H whether or not an
                  individual has been given a PH suggestion or was at that time
                  under H?
                 9. Do you feel that an individual-can.be totally conditioned by H
                  so that be would be physically or mentally unable to ac2cept H
                  f rom another individual?
                10. Will you set out in detail any technique that you can think of,
                  that would convert an individual's entire thought processes.
                  For instance., from being pro-Soviet to being pro-American.  Can
                  you estimate how long a process like this might take?  Would
                  chemicals help in this situation?
                ii. Since it is our intention to recruit spe2cialists in foreign
                  languages.for overseas work along these lines we are interested
                  in., it is essential for us to make certain that they are
                  grounded in the H techniques.  Wwill you please write up a
                                                               akp, for
                  p                       -&ut long it would t        'you to
                  b                     ndiv:ldual up to apo:Lnt-of-being able to
                  c                     mselves.

          12.      Do you feel that it would be essential that you personally
                   would have to screen any  applicants.chosen?  Would  any  previous
                   experience hdlp?
          13.      Do you believe you  could  teach  individuals  of  other  nationalities?
           14.     AS3UMing that you give these individuals a very intense wofkout,
                   could it be done in two or three weeks?
           152.     would it be of any benefit to you if we taught these individuals
                   basic H befoi:e sending them to you or  would  you  prefer  to  ap-
                   proach them from.,the very start?
           16.     Since one of our main problems has to do  with  mental  and  physical
                   control of individuals, It is essential thatwe have your views
                   in detail on these subjecti. Please cover  this  fully  and  give  us
           2 your best opinion as to whether or not we can successfully control the
                   activities of individuals with the H technique and, if so, to what
                   extent? Can individuals travel  while  under  full  H'?  Have  you
                   worked experiments along these lines?  In this connection and in
                   connection with all.of the thoughts above, please  set  out  in  full
                   detail experiments that you feel should be  tried  in  the  fiel2d  of
                   H in connection with our work.  What  has  been  the  duration  of
                   the longest you have ever kept the subject under H in operation?
                 17. What has been the longest time you have ever worked a PH?
                 18. What is the most cociplex operation that  you  have  ever  undertaken
                   with subjects under H?
                 19. Please set out In detail what methods you regard as the quickest,
          2         surest and safest ways of inudcing H?
                 20. What are,the best tests to indicate whether or not the subject
                   is under H? What  tests  do  you'regard-as  best  for  determining
                   depth of H?
                 21. @3ihee you are aware of the nature of some of our  work,  it  is
                   essential that you give-considerable thought    to wtiether or not'
                   we can force an in2dividual to  act  against  his  own  moral  con-
                   cepts or act in such a way to endanger  'nis  or  others  lives.
                   In short, how long can we go along these  lines  and  I  am  not
                   referring  to  the  "College-type"  experiments.  Knowing  as  you
                   do from our set-ups, do you feel tiiat we  could  actual-ly  use
                   li against large groups  of  individuals  particularly  using  the
                  5 subtle way.for propaganda purposes?
                 22. Can you develop and teachthecaroted artery technique?
                 23. Inconnection with the questions  set  out  above  on  tests,  will
                   you set out in detail tests for suggestibility and any, techniques

                                                                     - ----- ----
           you may regard as good that can be used to show whether or not an
           individual may possibly be a good H subject.  Tests Of this type
           should be very subtle or completely hidden.
      24.  As you know, quite often, it is possible to get a subject  to  drink
           with you either beer or hard liquors. How would this  affect  the  H
           technique ftd can2 you suggest ways we could use this  as  a  meansof
           obtaining H control of a subject?
      25.  You discussed with ugbefore the technique of using couriers -who were
           H conditioned, I should like to have more details on that  and  your
           ideas along those-lines.  '4e would like to have you write up a
           critique of the       @.operation from your professional poi-nt of view
           covering your methods,, reaults, and any5 ideas you ntght have in con-
           nection with this type of work along similar lines., particul:irly ex-
           plaining the technique of going.through an interpretor.

