                                           CT ION V!i I TH BOL GIVE
                 ATTE&IPTS TO BLOCK LSD REA
                            SIAAULTANEOUSLY Xf[TH LSD
                             ne n t                       se the
                These exper 1,   s were carried out becau
            close chemical stmilart@ty of BOL and LSD suggested that
                                         ton by competingl with LSD
      2      SOL might block the LSD react
            for receptor slteso
                          used were 15 nonfolerant former morphine
                Subjects
            addictso al I Negro males who were T'n good physical con-
            dition who presented no evidence of major psychoses.
            Nbst of these patients had had considerable experience
            with LSD.  They received., In randonized order, the
            f2ollowing drug combinations:  BOL placebo plus LSD placebo;
            BOL plus LSD; .and BOL placebo plus LSD.  The combination
            of BOL plus LSD placebo was not studied because of the
            shortage of SOL, and also because the results should be
            Identical with those described In the report dealing with
            the acute effects of BOL.
                 The dosace of BOL was  2-4 -no./10 ko. of bod1ywetmhf
            and was given with the LSD. Nine patie.nii-s' received the
            higher dose.  The dose of,LSD was  0.5-1.5 mcg,-,i./kg.
            Smaller doses vi@-.re used'in the first pati,znlls testeds
            because of the possibili@y that the drugs might synergize.

------------                                                 2
               Methods.   Measurements    Included threshold for  kneelerks,
         pupillary diameter,   systolic blood   pressure, the Abramson@
         Jarylk  quest tonnalre, and grading    of mental effects   using
         the scale previously described.       The results are  shown  In
         the table, a  copy  of  which  was  sent with my letter2 of
         8 March 1957.    It Is obvious that there   was  no significant
         blocking of the LSD   reaction  and   no accentuation  of   it.
              Co.nclusion.   Adm-lntstration   of BOL stnultancously
         with LSD does not  block  or  accentuate  th%e  LSD  reaction*
         'Irhere Is no reason to believe  that  giving  SOL  after  LSD
         would',give any different resultso  since 8 Ginzel  and  tviayer-
         Gross have reported that Intravenous admtnistration of BOL
         does  not  reverse  the  LSD  reaction.  These  results  suggest
         that the  attenuation  of  the  LSD  reaction  observed  after
         two days  pre-freatment with  LSD  Is  due  to  the  development
         of cross  folzrance.

               Discussion.  Because of  the Inconclusiveness of
          the experiment  it will have to               'Fo
                                          be repoc,*T-fed* rfunately
          we have succeeded  In obtaining an additional supply of
          BOL and will repeat the experiment using a  larger number
          of subjic.ts, all of whom will be tested with LSD prior
          to Initiation of the formal experiment In order to
          eliminate nonreactors or to establish a dosage which
          will create a significant degree of reaction.  We
          Trttend to give BOL for three days prior to LSD.. two
               31
          days prior to LSD.. and to do another experiment In
          which a single dose will be given two hours before the
          LSD.

