             RESEARCH ON SIDE-TONE DELAY
             AS AN INTERROGATION DEVICE
                                By
                            May, 1953

                                   Final Report
            RESEARCH ON SIDE-TONE DELAY AS AN INTERROGATION DEVICE
                                       by
                                    May, 1953
                      ContractPeriod: Junel, 1952toMay3l, 1953

                                              I N D E X
                                                                                  P age
                   Aims and Purpose of this Research                                 I
             II.   How the Side-Tone Delay Was Produced                              2
             III.  Effect of the Side-Tone Delay on a Subject                        3
             IV.   The Gainina of Confqssions Dependent Upon Two Factors   2          4
             V.    Procedures                                                        5
             VI.   Side-Tone Delay Instrument Is Not a Lie-Detector                 14
             VII.  The Testing of Criminal Suspects                                 is
             VIII. Examples of Experimental Cases                                   19
             IX.   Instrumentation                                                  28
             X.    Conclusions           5                                           34
             XI.   Bibliography                                                     39

                RESEARCH ON SIDE-TONE DELAY AS AN INTERROGATION DEVICE
           I.  Aims and Purpose of this Research.
                   The primary aim and purpose of this project was to obtain a successful
               interrogation device from the effects of side-tone delay, toaether with an
               appropriate procedure for its use with a minimum number of attachments.
                   The secondary aim, developed in this laboratory, was to obtain more
               e2asily interpreted polygraph records by use of side-tone delay in con-
               junction with the polygraph.2
             Throughout the report this phenomenon is termed "Side-Tone Delay" and
           for brevity the initials STD are used.  Previous investigators in this field have
           used other terms to denote this same phenomenon.  For example, Professor
           John W. Black, Ohio State University, terms it "Delayed Side-Tone, 11 while
           Professor Grant Fairb5anks, University of Illinois, has referred to it as
           "Delayed Auditory Feedback.
           2 The,,-.-, - Polygraph was utilized for these experiments. It provides for
           the recording of five different responses -- blood pressure-pulse, respiration,
           galvanic skin reflex, arm movements, and thigh-leg movements.  This poly-
           graph is the only instrument equipped with arm and leg movement recorders.

                How the Side-Tone Delay Was Produced.
                    Basically the side-tone delay phenomenon was produced in this
                laboratory by the following method:
                        The subject's speech was picked up by a microphone, which
                    was connected to a tape recorder.  At the recording head of
                    this instrument the speech was recorded on a moving tape, and
                    then this speech was reproduced when that p2art of the tape -
                    reached the playback head of the instrument.  This. reproduce
                    speech was then amplified by the amplifier which, in turn, was
                    connected to the subject's earphones.
                    Thus, the subject hears through his earphones what he has previously
                said.  How later he hears his speech is dependent upon two equally im-
                portant factors: first, the distance the recording tape must travel2 from
                the recording head to the playback head, and second, the speed at which
                the recording tape is traveling.
                    That is, the amount of delay depends upon the time it takes for the
                moving tape to go from the recording head to the playback head.  If this
                interval of time is .20 seconds, the delay is . 20 seconds.  Naturally, if
                either the distance between these two heads is varied or if the speed of2
                the tape is changed, the amount of delay will also correspondinaly change.
                                                   2

          III. Effect of the Side-Tone Delay on a Subject.
                  It was first believed that the general effect of delaying the side-tone
               on a subject was to retard his speech and cause a variance in his vocal
               intensity.  This belief was based upon the findings of previous experimenters.3
               It was found at the    laboratory that this phenomenon only occasionally
               occurred. It is thought by the investigators that the amount 2of difficulty
               experienced by the subject might be based upon- his education, intelligence,
               social consciousness, or a combination of these three factors.  In most
               cases it appeared that the more education and higher intelligence a sub-
               ject had, the areater difficulty he experienced with the side-tone delay.
                           C2
           3  For example, Black, John W.,  "The Effect of Delayed Side-Tone upon
           Vo2cal Rate and Intensity, " THE JOURNAL OF SPEECH AND HEARING DIS-
           ORDERS, 16, 1951, 56-60; Lee, B. S., "Some Effects of Side-Tone Delay,
           JOURNAL OF THE ACOUSTICAL SOCIETY OF AMERICA, 22, 1950, 639-640;
           and'4ee, B. S., "Effects of Delayed Speech Feedback, 11 JOURNAL OF THE
           ACOUSTICAL SOCIETY OF AMERICA, 22, 1950, 824-8Z6.
                                                  3

          IV. The GaininoF of Confessions Dependent upon Two Factors.
                   The use of the STD instrument in obtaining  confessions,  the  primary
               aim of this project, is mainly dependent upon two things -- the interrogator
               and his procedure. No instrument or device can even partially fulfill  the
               basic requirement of having a good interrogator, and he must have suitable
               procedures to use with the STD instrument.2
                   The interroaator is the man in charge of the situation, and how he
               performs will determine whether the interroaation is a success or a failure.
               From this, one can logically conclude that the interrogator who is  better
               qualified and trained will gain more confessions and information than  the
               interrogator who is unqualified or who is untrained.  This is true regardless
               of whether the STD instrument is or is 2not utilized during an interrogation.
                   Therefore, the better interrogator will obtain more  confessions  with
               the STD instrument than the poor interrogator.  The STD instrument is
               certainly no panacea for the poor interrogator.  In fact, the poor interrogator
               will not only obtain little information through the use of the instrument, he
               possibly will hinder the investigation.
                                      5             4

          V.  Procedures.
                   Because the interrogator must have suitable procedures to use with the
               STD instrument, the investigators devoted the first five months of this
               project to developing and preliminarily experimenting with various interro-
               gational procedures and techniques.  A great number of criminal suspects
               were experimented with during these months in order to determine which
               procedures migh2t be the most effective.  Conclusions were reached as to
               their practicability, and the following procedures were deemed worthy for
               further experimentation.  These are now listed and explained alona with a
               statement as to their value.
                   It was decided that regardless of the type of procedure used, the subject
               should be instructed before the use of the STD as to what he would experience
               if he was not tellinc2, the truth. The actual wording of this instruction, of course,
               was based upon the subject's intelligence, but the following is a sample
               instruction.-
                        "This instrument is a very sensitive device, and when you lie about
                   a fact you have mental conflicts regarding that lie.  These conflicts are
                   indicated in your voice, and this instrument amplifies these conflicts
                   and they are heard2 as actual stuttering and hesitations. ,4
           4 When the subject asked why he even stuttered on the irrelevant questions
          (those questions not pertaining to the crime and to which the subject is telling the
          truth, e. g. , "Where were you born?"), the examiner replied:
                        "You are not really thinking about where you were born and about
                   those other meaningless questions.  You are waiting for the crime
                   question1s to be asked, and you are worried about whether the instrument
                   will show you are telling the truth or show that you are lying.  That's
                   why you stutter on these meaningless questions.
                                                   5

               A.  Use of the Polyaraph and Then the Side-Tone Delay Instrument.
                                  C2
                        1.  The polygraph is used first to determine actual points
                   of deception.  Then during the oral interrogation the side-tone
                   delay instrument is used at these points of deception.  The STD
                   switch is turned on at points of deception and is turned off when
                   the subject is tel2ling the truth.
                   This procedure was found to be of great value for several reasons.
               First, the interrogator knew before the use of the STD on which questions
               the subject was not telling the truth.  Second, the STD is introduced after
               the polyaraph, therefore, the interrogator's psychological position is
               greatly strengthened just as the interrogation begins.
                   However, the objection to this procedure is 2that an additional instru-
               ment, the polygraph, must be used as well as the services of a competent
               polygraph examiner.
               B.  Joint Use of Side-Tone Delay and Polygraph Instruments.
                        1.  Manually manipulating STD switch at points of possible
                   deception while the polygraph is in actual operation.
                   This method was found to be of value only when used for its psychological
               e4ffect because the resulting polygraph records were too distorted for a
               correct interpretation.  Naturally, no dependable comparison of polygraph
               responses could be made between the irrelevant and relevant (crime)
                                                   6

              questions because of the switching on of the STD at the relevant questions.
              This introdu ced a strong stimulus that was not present during the irrelevant
              questions.
                  This procedure was found to be of some value in those cases where it
              could be assumed before the examination that the subject would be lying
              about the matter under investigation.  This assumption can only be made
              in those cases wher2e the subject has been implicated in a trustworthy
              confession by one of his co-conspirators, or when the subject is a prisoner-
              of-war.  In the latter case, the subject is probably withholding information
              about his equipment, deployment of his fellow troops, and other information
              that is of great value to an intelligence unit.
                       2.  Side-tone delay in operation throughout the polygraph tests.
                  In the 2majority of the cases with this procedure the STD did not
              materially distort the polygraph recordings so as to prevent a correct
              interpretation from being made, since the stimulus of the STD was constant
              throughout the polygraph test.
                   The secondary aim of this project, developed by this laboratory, was
              to determine if more easily interpreted polygraph records could be ob-
              tainect by the joint use of the STD 4and the polygraph.  This procedure,
              that is,'the STD in operation throughout the polygraph tests, appeared to
              be the only procedure feasible to determine the value of this aim.  After
              completely reviewing all the records obtained by this procedure it was
              determined that many times the polygraph records were probably much
                                                  7

             harder to interpret, because of the use of the STD, than they would have
             been without its use.  Sometimes the records were completely uninterpre-
             table because of the use of the STD.  Many times the subject's attention and
             interest were focused on the STD and its effect, rather than to whether or
             not he was telling the truth on the questions being asked.  In fact, the STD
             caused two subjects, later verified as i2nnocent, to respond during the
             polygraph test as guilty.  These guilty responses were in contrast to their
             innocent responses on the polygraph tests when questioned without the use
             of the STD.
                 This last procedure appeared to be the most desirable of the two
             possibilities listed under this category,  Joint Use of Side-Tone Delay and
             Polygraph Instruments.  The investigators originally thought that while the
       2      STD was operating there might be more difficulty on the part of the subject
             to answer his question smoothly when he attempted deception.  Since the
             polygraph is believed to record mental conflicts and the fear of detection,
             it was thought that with the STD these conflicts might be translated into a
             speech impediment at the points of deception.  In ordinary polygraph tests
             it has been found that some verified auilty subjects experien9ce mental blocks
             at points of deception.
                  But it was found during this experiment that when an STD subject ex-
             perienced mental blocks it had nothing to do with his truth telling.  Rather,
             it was the effect of the STD which caused the subject to have these mental
             blocks, since they appeared on the irrelevant questions as well as the relevant
                                                 8

             (crime) questions of both the auilty and the innocent.  At no t'me during this
             experiment did mental blocks occur only on the relevant questions.
                  The following are the types of questions and answers that can be utilized
             when the STD and polygraph are used jointly:
                      a.   Direct, unambiguous questions requiring "yes" or
                           "no" answers.  This is the most commonly used type
                      2     of polygraph question and answer.
                      b.   Direct, unambiguous questions with previous instruction
                           given to the subject to use short-term answers.  These
                           answers als          the usual "yes" or "no" reply,
                                      o require
                           followed by a very short sentence.  Examples of this
                           type answer are "Yes, I do, 11 or "No. I did not".
     2                 C.   Direct, unambiguous questions with previous instruc-
                           tion given to the subject to use long-term answers.
                           These answers also require the usual "yes" or linoll
                           reply, but then a statement follows which repeats the
                           essential points of the test question.  For example,
                           if the question was "Did you steal that $1, 000 last
 9                          Saturday night?", the answer would be, "No, I did
                           not steal that $ 1, 000 last Saturday night.
                      d.   Searching-type questions with narrative answers
                           required, e. a. , "Where were you last night at ten
                           O'clock?"; "I was at Kelly's tavern drinking beer
                           with the boys.
                                                 9

                  Of these four types of questions and answers, B, the question requiring
              a ?'yes" or "no" answer followed by a short sentence, appeared to be the
              most effective when both the polygraph and STD instruments were used at
              the same time.  It was effective because the polygraph records were usually
              not too distorted to prevent a diagnosis of guilt or innocence while the  sub-
              ject experienced the STD effect.  Ho2wever, in some cases with this type
              question and answer, the polygraph records were too distorted because of
              the STD for an interpretation to be made.
                  When the subjects answered "yes"  or  "no"  (type  A  answer),  there  was
              no apparent evidence that the STD affected them.  Consequently, this type
              answer with the STD did not help to improve the interpretability of the poly-
              graph records.
                   2The long-term answer (type C answer) was objectionable in those cases
              involving subjects who experienced difficulty in speaking with the STD,
              because their resulting polygraph records were too  distorted  for  a  correct
              interpretation. This distortion was caused  by  several  factors.  First,  the
              subject's polygraph respiration recording was drawn-out and thereby dis-
              torted because the time required to answer the question wa8s more than
              usual.  Second, the blood pressure-pulse recording was often distorted
              because the subject, in experiencing speech difficulty due to the STD,
              attempted to express his thoughts by moving his arms and hands.  When
              these movements occurred, the blood pressure-pulse recorder indicated
              movements instead of natural responses.
                                                    10 -

                            - - - - - - - ------------------------------ - -
                  The narrative answer (type D answer) has the same disadvantages as
              the long-term answer, that is, the resulting polygraph records are often too
              distorted because of the STD.  In addition to this, the polygraph examiner
              experienced difficulty in having the subject follow instructions,  which  were
              to respond with a full and complete answer to the 2question.  Usually the
              subject's answer consisted of one or two words.  For example, if the subject
              was asked where he was last Saturday night, he would reply, "Home",
              instead of the answer the subject gave before the test, "I was home with my
              wife and kids watching television.
              C.  Use of Only the Side-Tone Delay Instrument.
                       1.  Manual manipulation of STD switch during the interrogation
              2    at the points of possible deception.
                  Because there is no utilization of the polygraph with this procedure,
              the interrogator must assume beforehand that the subject is guilty.  For
              this procedure to be most effective, the interrogator  must  have  the  STD  on
              whenever he believes the subject to be lying.  This necessitates guessing on
              the part of the interrogator as to when the subject will lie.  Obviously,  the
           5   effectiveness of the procedure is greatly diminished as soon as the interro-
              gator makes an erroneous  guess.  Probably  no  confession  will  result  from
              a guilty subject if many such wrong guesses occur.
                  Moreover, with this procedure the interrogator does not know before
              the interrogation if the subject is guilty or innocent. In the areat  majority

              of cases the interrocrator will still not know even after the interroaration.
                   2.   The STD operating continuously and purely as an interroaa-
              tional   device.
                        a.   During the interrogation, while the STD is con-
                             tinuously operating, the subject is allowed to
                             interrupt in order to make his denials.  The
                             examiner may the2n call the subject to task for
                             his failure to express himself without stuttering
                             and/or hesitation.
                   Again, the ouilt or innocence of a subject cannot be reliably determined
              if this procedure is used unless the subject fully confesses or makes serious
              admissions against his interest.
                        b.   While the STD is continuously operating, the
                             inter2rogator uses the technique of immediately
                             stopping the subject from fully discussing the
                             case while an appeal for the truth is made by
                             the interrogator.  When this appeal appears to
                             change the tenor of the subject's denials, he is
                             then allowed to make any explanation regarding
                             his position in the case.  In doing so he will ex-
  7                           perience difficulty due to the effects of the STD.
                             When this difficulty is brought to the subject's
                             attention it might materially aid in obtaining a
                             confession.
                                                     12

                   Of the three possible techniques listed under this category, Use of
               Only the Side-Tone Delay Instrument, this last technique, Zb. , appears
               to be most effective, providing the interrogator has mastered the art of
               inoffensively stopping the subject from reaistering his denials until the
               interroaator invites his comments.  Using this technique the interrogator
               must also be familiar w2ith the changes that occur in the subject's facial
               expressions, physical actions, and verbal comments which will acquaint
               the interrogator as to the proper time to invite these comments.
                   The obvious objection to this procedure is that unless the subject
               confesses, the interrogator does not know whether the subject is innocent
               or guilty.  This particular drawback, not being able to establish the guilt
               or 2innocence of a subject, applies to all procedures in which there is no
               utilization of the polygraph.  In a great majority of cases guilt or innocence
               can be readily de termined by a competently conducted polygraph examina-
               tion.4
           4 As a matter of fact, all of the procedures proposed in this project fall far
           short of the effectiveness of the ordinary polygraph techniques.  With a compe-
           tently conducted polygraph9 examination, the guilt or innocence of a subject can
           be determined in over 95 per cent of the cases, and over 60 per cent of those
           reported auilty confessed to the examiner.  (These statistics are based upon
           those of the      laboratory in         during a five-year period ending
           December 31, 1952.
                                                    13 -

          VI. Side-Tone Delay Instrument Is Not a Lie-Detector.
                   During these experiments the investigators never considered the STD
               instrument to be a lie-detector or an instrument to be used in place of
               the lie-detector.  The investigators never found any significant correlation
               whatsoever between the results of the STD tests and the subject's guilt or
               innocence.  Therefore, the STD instrument should not be considered7 as a
               type of lie-detector.
                                                   14

           VII. The Testing of Criminal Suspects.
                    After developing and preliminarily experimentina with  the  e  variou
                procedures for five months, in November, 1952, a more suitable arrange-
                ment was made with the                                  Judge of the
                Municipal Court              The Judge agreed to steadily supply this
                laboratory with criminal defendants who appeared to be auilty, yet who
  2              claimed innocence. Before this  time  criminal-case  subjects  were  only
                irregularly submitted to this laboratory by various judges of the Municipal
                Court
                                   was in charge of Boys Court, and this court was believed
                by the investigators to be the most representative for this  laboratory's
                purposes since it handles criminal preliminary hearings for boys ranging in
                age from 16 2to 21.  Also under this court's jurisdiction are adults who have
                been implicated in crimes with boys in this age group.  Most of the cases
                referred to this laboratory by Boys Court were of a felonious nature, how-
                ever, misdemeanors were sometimes included.
           5  Throughout the entire contract period many other subjects, besides those
           arrested for felonies and misdemeanors, were experimented with on the STD in-
           stru2ment.  Mainly in this group were applicants for trusted positions in various
           companies.  These subjects were questioned concerning their general honesty,
           honesty at former places of employment, previous arrests, and bad habits such
           as excessive indebtedness, gamblina, and drunkenness.  Also included in these
           experiments were those people involved  in  quasi-criminal  matters,  such  as
           bastardy cases from the           Municipal Court.
     6                                               15

                   The first of these subjects arrived on November 12, 1952.  From that
              time until January 19, 1953, appointments were made for the examining of
              51 of these subjects, of whom Z6 appeared and agreed to be tested.  During
              this period the investigators' main effort, besides determining the guilt or
              innocence of a subject, was in having the subject experience speech difficulty
              because of the2 STD.  The results of these examinations follow:
                   Table One.  Outcome of the Examinations*
                                                                  White             Colored
                         Innocent                                    6                 iz
                         Guilty                                      1(1 con-           6 (3 con-
                                                                      fession)            f2e ssions)
                         Indefinite                                  0                   1
                   *As   determined by the        Polygraph     and/or full confessions.
                   Table Two.  Speech Difficulty While STD Operating**
                                                                  White             Colored
                         Innocent                             Z Fours, 3 Twos,      ZFours, 3 Threes,
                                           2                   1 One                 3 Twos, 4 Ones
                         Guilty                               1 Two (conf.          1Four (conf.
                                                                                    1Three,
                                                                                    ITwo (conf.),
                                                                                    3 Ones, (1 conf.)
           0              Indefinite                           None                  I Two
                      Scale of Speech Difficulty
                         Five          Great difficulty
                         Four          Some difficulty
                         Three         Little difficulty
                         Two           Very little difficulty
                         One           No apparent difficulty
                                                      16 -

                    From January 19 to February 11, 1953, 17 additional Boys Court subjects
               as  well  as  other  subjects  were  experimented  with  in  this  laboratory.   During
               this period the investigators' main attention was directed towards obtaining
               confessions  from  the  subjects  by  use  of  procedures  with  the  STD  rather  than
               having the subjects experience speech difficulty because of the STD.  The
        2       results of these experiments with the Boys Court subjects were:
                    Table   Three.   Outcome   of   the   Examinations*
                                                                    White              Colored
                         Innocent                                     6                   5
                         Guilty                                       3 (2 con-           3 (I con-
                                                                      2   fessions)            fession)
                         Indefinite                                   0                   0
                    *As  determined by the          Polygraph      and/or full confessions.
                    Table Four.  Speech Difficulty While STD Operating**
                                                                     White             Colored
                         Innocent                             3 Fours, 1 Three,      1 Four, 3 Twos,
     2                                                         2 Twos                 I One
                         Guilty                               2 Fours, (lconf.)      2 Twos  (I  conf.
                                                              I Three (conf.)        I Two
                         Indefinite                           None                   None
                       Scale of Speech Difficulty
                         Five            Great   difficulty
    1                     Four            Some    difficulty
                         Three           Little  difficulty
                         Two             Very little difficulty
                         One             No apparent difficulty
                                                         17

                 As shown by Table Two and Table Four, very few subjects stuttered or
             hesitated to any extent when the STD was operating.  This is especially
             sianificant in Table Two, since with these subjects the investigators con-
             centrated on having the full effect of the STD occur. It was originally thought
             that the more difficulty a guilty subject had in speaking because of the STD
             effect, the more likely he was to confess2.  However, Table Four indicates
             that about the same percentage of confessions was gained when the interro-
             gator concentrated on the interrogation procedures rather than having the
             STD effect occur.
                  Therefore, since January the investigators were not too concerned about
             the effect of the side-tone delay per se, but they concentrated on the pro-
             cedures to be used with the STD instrument so that confessions couid b8e
             more easily and readily obtained.  These and the other experiments since
             then have proven that most guilty subjects confess, even though their speech
             was unaffected by the STD device.
                                                 18

         VIII. Examples of Experimental Cases.
                   The following ten cases were selected as representative examples upon
              which various conclusions were based as to the value of the STD.  In these
              ten cases the subjects were males of varying intelligence and education.
              With the STD all these subjects were interrogated as guilty, even when the
              interrogator believed them to be innocent.  Opinions are expressed at the
    2          end of each case concerning the value of the STD in that particular case.
              These expressed opinions were found to be duplicated in other cases.
                   1.  The subject, a 17 year old with a 10th grade education, was
              arrested for attempted burglary.  A store window was broken, and the
              burglar was frightened away because the breaking attracted the attention
              of several persons.  One of these later identified 2the subject as the perpe-
              trator.  The subject denied the accusation.
                   Test 1:  Polygraph, no STD, short-term answers.  The records
                            indicated he was guilty.
                   Test 2:  Polygraph and STD operating simultaneously with short-term
                            answers.  Again the polygraph records indicated he was
                            guilty.  Subject had very little speech difficulty because of
       5                     the STD.
              Interrogation with STD: Subject made no admissions, and after 30 minutes
                       STD turned off and subject's earphones removed.
              Interrogation without STD: Within 30 seconds the subject fully confessed to
                       the crime and also confessed another attempted burglary.  When
                                                    19 -

                     asked why he hadn't confessed earlier, he stated, "I wanted to wait
                     until this thing (pointed to the STD earphones) was taken off.
            Opinions: The STD did not help to improve the polygraph responses, and
                     it greatly hindered the interrogation.
                 2.  C. S. , J. K., & P. H. were accused of assault and battery upon a
            young couple, as-well as threatening them with a knife and promising to
 2           "blast them" with a gun if they made an outcry. All three subjects denied
            any knowledge concerning this occurrence.
                 C. S. , 18 years old, high school student:
                 Tests 1, 2, & 3: The STD and polygraph operated simultaneously with
                          short-term answers.  No speech difficulty. Records indi-
                          cated he was guilty.
            Interrogation with STD: Subject made no admis2sions.
                 J. K., 21 years old, hiah school graduate:
                 Tests 1 &  2: STD and polygraph operated simultaneously with short-
                          term answers.  No speech difficulty.  Records indicated he
                          was guilty.
            Interrogation with STD: Subject made no admissions.
                 P. H. , 20 years old, hiah school graduate:
                 Tests 1 & 2: Polygraph, no STD, short-term answers.  Bo2th tests
                          indicated he was telling the truth on the questions pertaining
                          to actual participation, but indicated he had guilty knowledge.
                                                20 -

                Test 3: STD and polygraph used with short-term answers.  Subject had
                         no speech difficulty due to the STD.  This record was similar
                         to his first two records.
            Interrogation with STD: The subject readily admitted that he saw C. S. and
                J. K. accost the couple, that he heard J. K. threaten to shoot them, and
                that he knew C. S. had a knife.
            Opinions: In this case th2e STD did not help to obtain a confession from the
                     two verified guilty subjects, nor did it help the examiner in his
                     interpretation of the polygraph records.  The interrogator believed
                     that P. H. would have confessed without the use of the STD.
                3.   The subject, a 17 year old with a 10th grade education, was arrested
            for armed robbery of a newspaper boy.  The subject claimed that he was
      2      "being framed" by the newspaper boy and the one witness.
                Polygraph tests: The subject was given four tests with yes and no
                     answers, and no STD.  His polygraph responses were ambiauous
                     and inconsistent.
            Interrogation with STD: Within 30 seconds the subject started to cry, however,
                     he still maintained his innocence.  Subject experienced some speech
                     difficulty because of the S3TD.
            Re-examination two days later: Again the subject was given four polygraph
                     tests without any STD.  This time the records indicated he was
                     telling the truth.
                                                21 -

             The innocence of the subject was later definitely verified.
             Opinions: The use of the STD may cause an innocent person to break down
                     emotionally, but if it is properly used no false confession will result.
                 4.  The subject, an AWOL Air Force Corporal, was accused of assault
             and battery and also armed robbery.  He was arrested with a friend, but
             both denied being the perpetrator.
                 Tests 21 & 2: Polygraph and STD used together on both tests with short-
                          term answers.  Both polygraph records indicated that the
                          corporal was guilty.  The subject had little speech difficulty
                          because of the STD.
             Interrogation with STD: After six minutes the subject fully confessed and
                     implicated his co-defendant as well.
             Opinions: This subject's polygraph records w2ere not too distorted to prevent
                     interpretation, even though he did experience some speech difficulty.
                     The interrogator believed that the subject would have confessed to
                     the crime even without the use of the STD.
                 5.  The subject, an 18 year old with a 9th grade education, was arrested
             for stealing a wallet from a man's pocket.  The wallet was not found on the
             subject, alt5hough he was immediately arrested and searched.  Subject denied
             the charge.
                 Test 1: Polygraph used by itself with yes and no answers.  Records
                          indicated that he stole the wallet.
                                                22

                  Test 2:  Polygraph and STD used jointly with short-term answers.
                            The subject experienced no speech difficulty.  There was no
                            significant difference in the subject's two test records.
              Interrogation with STD: Subject made no admissions.
              Opinions: The STD did not help to  improve  the  polygraph  records,  nor  did
                       it help to gain a confession.
                  6.   The subject, a 20 year old with a Znd grade education, was arrested
              for attempted murder and assault with a deadly weapon.  It was alleged that
              the subject stabbed the victim several times in the chest and throat.  The
              subject denied the accusation.
                  Test 1:  Polygraph, no STD, yes and no answers.  Records clearly
                            indicated that the subject was guilty.
                  Test 2:   Polygraph and 2STD operating simultaneously with yes and no
                            answers. Again the subject's record  indicated  he  was  guilty,
                            but this time the polygraph records were much harder to
                            interpret since distortion occurred in the record due to the
                            slight speech difficulty induced by the STD.
              Interrogation with STD: Although questioned for a long  period  of  time,  the
                      3 subject made no admissions.
              Opinions: The STD did not improve the  polygraph  records,  nor  did  it  help
                       to obtain a confession.
                                                   23 -

                  7.  The subject, a 17 year old Marine with an I lth arade education, was
             accused of attempted rape and assault with a deadly weapon.  The subject
             claimed this was a case of mistaken identity.
                  Tests 1 & Z: Polygraph,  no  STD,  yes  and  no  answers.  Records  clearly
                           indicated he was telling the truth.
                  Test 3:  Polygraph and  STD  used  together  with  long-term  answers. 2 The
                           subject experienced speech difficulty and  his  polygraph  records
                           were distorted throughout because of the STD.
             Interrogation with STD: Subject made no admissions against interest.
                  Later it was proven that the subject's alibi was the truth and that he  was
             not the guilty person.
             Opinions: The use of the STD definitely helped to distort the polygraph records
                    2  when long-term  answers  were  required.  Interrogation  with  the  STD
                      instrument did not induce a false confession.
                  8.  Two high school students, G. H. and C. B., both 17 years old, were
             examined in regard to an alleged breaking and entering, assault and battery,
             and assault with a deadly weapon.  Both subjects denied doing what the com-
             plainants alleged, and both said that they were innocent bystanders.
2                  G. H.:
                  Test 1:  Polygraph used, no STD, yes and no answers.  Records in-
                           dicated he was telling the truth.
                                                  24 -

                  Tests 2 & 3: Polyaraph and STD used together with long-term answers.
                            No speech difficulty because of the STD, although these records
                            were distorted in comparison to the first test record.
              Interrogation with STD: Subject maintained his innocence.
                  C. B.
                  Test 1:  Polygraph, no STD, yes and no answers.  Record indicated
                            tru2th-tellina on all questions but one, a minor issue unde-r
                            investigation.
                  Test 2:   Polygraph and STD used together, with yes and no answers.
                            The record was similar in its indications to test 1.  The sub-
                            ject experienced little speech difficulty.
              Interrogation with STD: Readily admitted doing the act which the polygraph
                  had indicated that he ha2d done, but vehemently denied doing what the
                  polyaraph had indicated he had not done.
              Opinions: The use of the STD with the polygraph did not help to improve the
                       polygraph records, in fact, it distorted G. H. Is records.  The use
                       of the STD did not induce any false admissions from either of.these
                       subjects.  The interrogator believed that C. B. would have admitted
                       the minor is4sue without the use of the STD.
                  9.   The subject, 37 years old with 2 years of college education, was
              arrested for drunken driving.  The subject claimed he was merely a passenger
                                                   25 -

             in the car, and that another man was the actual driver.
                  Tests I & 2: Polygraph, no STD, yes and no answers.  Both records
                          indicated that he was the driver.
                  Test 3: Polygraph and STD operated simultaneously with yes and
                          no answers.  Subject's polygraph responses were similar
                          to those of the first two tests.
             Interrogation with STD: No sp2eech difficulty noticed.  During the interro-
                  gation the subject laughed at the interrogator and said, "Stop trying to
                  fool me with this ... (STD).
             Opinions: The STD did not improve the interpretability of the polygraph
                      records, nor did it help to aain a confession. In fact, it hindered
                      the interrogation because the subject knew something was amiss
                      and believed that he 2was being tricked.
                 10.  T. W. was arrested for assault and battery on the complaint of the
             victim, G. F.  In court, T. W. claimed that both G. F. and G. C. severely
             beat him when he did not permit them to "crash" a New Year's dance.  T. W.
             also stated that later that night his mother was "cussed out" by G. F. . and so
             he and several of his friends did assault G. F.   G. F. and G. C. both deny
             being at the da9nce or assaulting T. W.    G. F. also denies swearing at
             T. W. s mother.
                  G. F. , a 19 year old hiah school graduate:
                                        0
                  Test 1:  Polyaraph, no STD, yes and no answers.  The polyaraph
                                                 26

                            record indicated he was telling the truth.
                  Test 2:  STD and polyaraph used jointly with yes and no answers.  Sub-
                                         0
                            ject had very little speech difficulty. Record similar to test 1.
             Interrogated with STD: Made no admissions against interest.
                  G. C. , an 18 year old high school student:
                  Test  1:  Polygra2ph,  no  STD,  yes  and  no  answers.  Polygraph  record
                            clearly indicated he was telling the truth.
                  Test 2:   Polyaraph with STD, yes and no answers.  Subject had no
                            apparent speech difficulty. This  time  the  polygraph  records
                            indicated that he was lying!
             Interroaated with STD: Made no admissions against interest.
                  T. W. , an 18 year old h2igh school student:
                  Before his first test the subject confessed that G. F.  and  G.  C.  were
             not at the dance, that they did not strike him at any time, and that he made
             up the story about G. F. "cussing out" his mother.
                  In order to make sure this was the truth and not a statement given because
             of previous threats on the part of G. F. or G. C. , T. W. was given two poly-
             graph tests. The first test was 2of the regular type --  no  STD,  yes  and  no
             answers. The second polygraph test included the STD with short-term answers.
             On both polygraph records the responses clearly indicated that he was telling
             the truth. This proved that his confession was  trustworthy  and  that  G.  F.
             and G. C. were verified innocent.
             Opinions: When the STD was used during G. C. Is second polygraph test, it
                      caused him to respon3d as guilty although he is verified innocent.
                      However, the use of the STD did not induce either G. F. or G. C.
                      to make a false confession.
                                                   27 -

         IX. Instrumentation.
                  During the first five months of the contract period, while the investigators
              developed and preliminarily experimented with various procedures and tech-
              niques,                                   (instrument specialists employed
              by the investigators) were developing various side-tone delay instruments.
              Their aim was to design and construct an instrument that would prove prac-
       2       tical from an interrogator's standpoint.
                  The first instrument built was designed on the principle of a constant
              tape speed of about 40 inches per second along with a variable-distance
              between the recording and playback heads.  The recording head was fixed
              in position and the playback head was movable on a track, which was designed
              to preserve the alignment.  The tape, in the form of an endless loop, was
        2      carried over two light low-inertia pulleys, one of which was fixed, the other
              having a spring mounting which maintained a constant tension on the tape.
              The sound quality was fair.  The loop of tape, of overall length about 2 feet,
              appeared to give adequate results for periods up to one-half hour.
                  The overall quality of this instrument, however, was not by any means
              equal to the Magnecord equipment.  Although lower quali7ty amplifiers
              (Pentron) were used in this work, the main difference in quality was the
              noise inherent in the tape and in the head system.
                  %@onsequently, a variable-speed constant head-separation device was
              designed and built.  The heads were fixed in position at the minimum distance
                                                   z8

              (1 inch).  The endless loop of tape was driven by a variable-speed DC motor,
              using a 6-volt storage battery.  Since an overall speed range of at least 10-1
              was desired with good torque over the range, the use of a  resistance  in  the
              field was found to be inadequate.  The desired conditions were made by
              varying the armature resistance and the field resistance simultaneously, but
              in opposite di2rections.  In this way, a Z5-1 speed range was obtained with
              good torque. The range of delay with this equipment was from  about  .  02  to
               40 seconds.  However, the noise level of the machine was fairly high,
              apparently due to inadequate alignment and tracking of the tape.
                  It became apparent that construction of a higher  order  of  accuracy  was
              necessary.  It was decided to modify the Magnecord recordina unit by keepin2g
              a fixed relationship between the heads, and a constant tape speed by including
              means for varying the length of tape between the fixed record and playback
              heads.  This was done by an arrangement of small pulleys, the middle one of
 r            which was varied in distance from the heads.  In using this method, the
              amount of tape between the heads is twice the separation of the middle roller
              from the heads.  When this apparatus 2was constructed and tested, it was
              found that the introduction of the auxiliary equipment in the neighborhood  of
              the heads upset the shielding system and resulted in the introduction of a
              fair amount of noise. Consequently, the position of  the  heads  was  modified
              to the extent that they were turned at 1800 so that the gaps faced each  other
              and were about 1/411 apart.  A shield was inserted between1 the heads and a
              small pulley mounted on a shaft running in micro  ball-bearings  was  used  to
                                                   29 -

           Figure 1.   VARIABLE-DELAY, MODIFIED TRIPLE-HEAD UNIT
                                        (Front View)
                             L
                                                          lit
                (1) Guide rollers.                 (6) Magnetic shield between heads.
                (2) Erase head.                    (7) Playback head.
                (3) Record head.                   (8) Tape drive4 capistan.
                (4) Tape guides.                   (9) Pressure roller.
                (5) Adjustable guide with          (10) Recording tape.
                   pointer and variable-
                   delay scale.

            position'the tape.  The separation of this pulley from the heads was controlled
            by a dial which operated the carriage. The dial was calibrated directly  in
            delay in seconds.  This device was extensively tested in the          labora-
            tory and found to give, with 15 inches per second tape speed, delay which
            could be varied between  .07 seconds and .50 seconds.  The overall sound
            quality of this instrument ap2proximately equalled that of the original Magne-
            cord unit.  The apparatus was tested by means of a steady thousand cycle
            input from an audio frequency oscillator.  The sound from the playback head
            was examined and found to be of adequate quality from the standpoint of wow,
            flutter, and noise.  (See Figure 1.
                 The instrument described in the preceding paragraph was installed in the
            ,----.,laboratory on December 4,2 1952, and was tested extensively with actual
            criminal-case subjects.  The quality of reproduction steadily and rapidly
            deteriorated and after several weeks use it became  completely  inadequate.
                 Upon examination it was discovered that the recording tape was not
            properly tracking over the heads because of a major mechanical flaw.
            Apparently the mechanical ruggedness of the equipment  was  inadequate  for
            the conditions of0 use.  Thus, the effectiveness of this instrument was greatly
            limited. In an attempt to correct this flaw a number of  minor  adjustments
            were made, which somewhat rectified the problem at first, but did not fully
            correct the flaw.
                A small drive pulley was then constructed for use with the standard
            Magnecord equipment.  This attachment permitted a delay of .30 seconds
                                                30 -

              Figur-          VARIABLE-SPEED DRIVE, UNMODIFIED TRIPLE-HEAD UNIT
                                                      (Top View)
                                                                               7+7
                 (1) Motor rails.                          (10) Self aligning ball bearing.
                 (2) Delay control handle.                 (I 1) Spring tension nut and lock nut.
                 2(3) Motor.                                (12) Pressure spring.
                 (4) Shaft extension and                   (13) Tape guide rollers.
                     11011 ring drive.                     (14) Triple head unit.
                 (5) Main drive disc.                      (15) Tape drive capistan.
                 (6) Idler drive disc.                     (16) Pressure roller.
                 (7) Idler drive9 rollers with
                     "Oll ring tires.                      Not  shown: -
                 (8) Main bearing.                             Oscillator unit and required
                 (9) Outer bearing.                        electrical connections.

            with the 7- 1/Z inch Der second tape speed.  This instrument was used while
            a new instrument was being constructed.
                 On January 15, 1953, the investigators requested the construction of a
            more refined variable-delay instrument, since it was believed that its re-
            finements would eliminate some of the difficulties encountered in previous
            instruments.  The refinement by the            laboratory consis2ted of a variable
            tape speed which was incorporated with the erase, record, and playback head
r
            assembly of the standard Magnecord.  In order to accomplish this, a standard
            Magnecord recording unit was completely dismantled and then rebuilt with a
            variable tape speed.  Also, the standard Magnecord synchronous motor was
            adjusted so as to drive a disc at variable distances from the axis.  The newly
            constructed drive was free from2 wow and had a 1 - 10  speed  range,  which
 T'
            meant the tape speed was 311 to 30" per second. This  provided  an  easily
            adjustable variable in the side -tone delay from . 041 to . 416 seconds.  The
            standard Magnecord endless-loop tape device was utilized in place  of  the
            standard two-reel device.  This instrument was delivered in March, 1953.
            (See Figure Z.)
                 This variable-delay instrum2ent proved to be the most durable  so  far
            tested because of its improved design and better construction. It provided
            the interrogator with an instrument which did not have disturbing wow,
            flutter, or noise.  The investigators thought that this improved instrument
            would provide a better evaluation of the variable side-tone delay  because
            of these refinements. It was believed that more subjects would be affected
                            4                     31

             by the side-tone delay phenomenon with this improved instrument and that
             more confessions might result.  However, in actual criminal cases it was
             found that the subjects, who were not affected by a preadjusted . 20  seconds
             delay, were usually not affected when the variable-delay device was used.
             This was true even though the entire range from .041 to . 416 seconds was
             utilized.  Furthermore, the subjects who2 were affected to any extent by
             the preadjusted delay of . 20 seconds were seldom affected to any greater
             extent when the delay was increased or decreased.  Also, the percentage
             of confessions did not increase with the use of this improved instrument.
                 In February, 1953, the investigators decided that possibly better re-
             salts could be obtained if the subject was not required to wear earphones.
             On May 12, 19523, additional apparatus was added to this variable-delay
             equipment so that it would be unnecessary for the subject to wear earphones.
             The elimination of the subject's earphones was  accomplished  by  adding  two
             throat microphones, an auxiliary amplifier, and two external speakers.
                 The microphones are of the crystal-contact type and were adapted as
             throat microphones since no commercial ones were available.  The subject's
       2      microphone is connected to the standard Magnecord amplifier, and the
             amplifier's meter switch  becomes  the  STD  off-and-on  switch.  The  Magne-
             cord's monitoring jack is the outlet from this instrument and it is connected
             directly to the auxiliary amplifier. The subject's speech goes  through  this
             auxiliary amplifier to the two external speakers.  The second throat micro-
             phone is used by the interrogator, but this micr4ophone is connected directly
                                                 32

        Figure 3.  VARIABLE-DELAY, EXTERNAL SPEAKERS:
                        Pictorial and Schematic Diagrams
                            c
              (1) Subject's microphone and cord.
              (Z) Magnecorder amplifier and special recording panel.
              (3) Interconnection cable.
              (4) Auxiliary,amplifier.
              (5A & B) Speakers and speaker cords.
              (6) Interrogat6or's microphone and cord.
              (7) Power input (I 17 V., 60 cy. AC.)
              (8) Power cord from Magnecorder amplifier (Plugs into
                  auxiliary amplifier)

              to the auxiliary amplifier, thence to the two external speakers. (See Figure 3.
                  Thus, the subject's speech can be delayed any desired time by means of
              the variable-speed constant head-separation device, while the interrogator's
              speech can  never  be  delayed.  Since  the  interrogator's  and  subject's  voices
              are heard through the same auxiliary amplifier and speakers, they both
              sound alike. Therefore, it 2was thought  that  the  subject  would  be  less  likely
              to suspect that his voice was  being  delayed  since  both  voices  sounded  alike.
                   Through experimentation at the              laboratory it was found that two
              external speakers were much more       effective in inducina the  STD  effect  than
              one speaker. With only one  speaker  the  subject  can  turn  his  head  and  focus
              his attention away from  the  source  of  his2  delayed  speech.  The  best  results
              were obtained when the two speakers were placed equidistant from each side
              of the subject.
                   However, in testing this laboratory's personnel with the external-speaker
              system, it was their opinion that  it  was  very  noticeable  that  the  instrument
              itself was causing the STD effect.  With the earphones, the subjects believed
              that they were at fault since their voices seemed 9directed at them without
              delay.  Because  the  external-speaker  system  so  obviously  delays  the   voice,
              it is believed that this arrangement will not help to obtain confessions; in
              fact, it will hinder the interrogator.
                                                     33 -

          X.  Conclusions.
                       1.   Experiments in this laboratory indicated that the . ZO second
                   delay was much more effective in producing the STDphenomenon than
                   any other delay ranaing from .02 to .50 seconds.  The conclusion,
                   that the . 20 second delay was the most effective, was in agreement
                   with the findings of other experimentors in this field. 6
                     2  2.   The difficulty in speaking encountered by the subjects at this
                   laboratory was far less than expected, even with the . 20 second delay.
                   In fact, the investigators were greatly surprised at the little difficulty
                   the subjects had in speaking with the STD.  The reports of other
                   experimentors seemed to indicate that most subjects would automatically
                   experience great difficulty in speaking. 7
2
          6  Guttman, Newman, "An Analysis of Articulation as a Function of Delayed
          Auditory Feedback, 11 M. A. Thesis, University of Illinois, 195 1.
          7  Included in the Summary of N. Guttman's thesis, ibid, was the following:
                       "Each of 16 male subjects read the same passage aloud under the
                   followina conditions of time delay: Unamplified, zero delay, no headset;
                   amplified, zero delay; amplified . 210, . 20, . 40, and . 80 sec. delays;
                   amplified, zero delay.  Data were obtained from phonetic transcriptions
                   of the readings.
                       In almost all measures the peak of disturbance was at . ZO sec.  In
                   comparison to zero delay total articulatory errors at the peak were
                   approximately 400% more numerous, articulatory rate decreased 30 to
                   4001o, phonetic output 9increased 8!o, and error rate increased 3001o.
                       Rate of error increased from one error every three seconds for
                   zero delay to more than one per second at . 20 sec.  Each of the
                                                            (continue at bottom of next page)
                                                  34 -

                These results indicated to the investigators that possibly the amount of
             difficulty the subject experienced due to the STD might be related to his
             educational background, intelligence, social consciousness, or a combination
             of these three factors.  This hypothesis was based upon the fact that previous
             experimentors apparently only used college students as their subjects, while
             many of the subjects at this laboratory w2ere uneducated, and their lack of
             social responsibility was often demonstrated by their numerous arrests.
                Their examinations at this laboratory was something very serious to
             these subjects since their liberty depended on the results of the examinations.
             No explanation as to the how and the why of the STD could be given to them,
             since the psychological value would then be completely destroyed.  Also,
             because so much was a2t stake for the subjects, the investigators could not
             expect complete mental or physical co-operation from them, especially from
             those who were guilty.
                      3.  Since it was found that the .20 second delay was the most effec-
                tive in producing the STD phenomenon, an unmodified Magnecord unit
                (PT63-J Amplifier and PT63-AH Recorder) which affords a delay of .20
                seconds, is sufficient as a STD 2instrument.  Any further instrumentation
                beyond this is unnecessary if future experiments are to be conducted
                individual types of error, substitution, omission, addition, and
                miscellaneous, also peaked at . 20 sec.
                    Rate of articulation, similar in pattern for each of the three
                measures of output, varied significantly with delay and was slowest
                at . 20 sec.
                                   0               35 -

                  in using the STD as an interrogation device.
                      4.  During this experiment almost every criminal-case subject,
                  considered innocent by the investigators, was interrogated with the
                  STD to determine if its use would  induce  a  false  confession.  Not  one
                  of these innocent subjects made any admissions against interest, how-
                  ever slight, when interrogated as guilty.  Therefore, it is belie2ved that
                  no false confessions or admissions  will  result  from  innocent  subjects
                  when the STD instrument is properly used.
                      5. It was found that  approximately  the  same  percentage  of  guilty
                  subjects confessed when the variable-delay instruments were used for
                  the interrogation as when  the  one  fixed-delay  instruments  were  used.
                  The total percentage of confessions from inter2rogated guilty STD
                  subjects amounted to approximately 56 per cent.  This figure of 56
                  per cent can be contrasted to the percentage of criminal confessions
                  gained at the      laboratory  between  January  1,  1948   and   December
                  31, 195Z.  During this five-year period, when no side-tone delay
                  instruments were used on the subjects, approximately 62 per cent
                  of the interrogated subject2s did confess to the crimes under investigation.
                       Thus, when one reviews the past year  in  its  entirety,  it  appears
                  that the side-tone delay did not increase the percentage of confessions.
                  When a confession was gained by the use of the STD instrument, it did
                  not materially reduce the time  required  for  obtaining  the  confession,
                  nor did it make the interrogation any easier.  Furthermore, the
     2                                               36 -

                 investiaators believe that the great majority of those who did confess
                 would have confessed anyhow without the use of the STD instrument!
                     In fact, there is a good possibility that the use of the STD actually
                 stopped a number of subjects from confessing their crimes.  This was
                 definitely proven to be true in two cases when, after fully confessing,
                 the subjects stated that they did not confe2ss earlier because of the
                 STD and that they waited until the STD instrument was turned off before
                 doing so.  Also, it is believed that during many other interrogations
                 the guilty subjects were so confused or bewildered by the STD effect
                 that they were no longer concerned about their crimes and were not
                 listening to what the interrogator said.  When the subject is actually
                 distracted by the effects of t2he STD, the interrogator's persuasiveness
                 is lost and there is very little likelihood of obtaining the confession.
                     6.  It is the opinion of the investigators that the future holds very
                 little hope for the side-tone delay instrument as an effective interro-
                 gation device.
                     7.  Also extensively tested in this laboratory was the hypothesis
                 that the use of the STD would produce more e3asily interpreted poly-
                 graph records.  The investigators considered this so important that
                 they added it to the project as its secondary aim.  Various types of
                 answers (yes or no, short-term, long-term, and narrative type
                 answers) were experimented with during polygraph tests when the
                 STD instrument was also being operated.
                                                 37 -

                     In the great majority of instances the STD was ineffective in
                 producing the desired results, and in many instances the STD affected
                 polygraph records so that they were more difficult to interpret.  In
                 fact, on two occasions the use of the STD actually defeated the
                 purpose of the polygraph tests.  On these occasions the side-tone
                 delay caused two verified innocent subjects to respond as if they5 were
                 actually guilty.
                     For these reasons the investigators believe that the STD instru-
                 ment should not be used in conjunction with the polygraph.
                                                 38

            Xi.                          BIBLIOGRAPHY
            1.   Black, John W. , "The Effect of the Consonant on the Vowel,
                 JOURNAL OF THE ACOUSTICAL SOCIETY OF AMERICA, X, 1939,
                 203 -205.
            2.   Black, J. W., "Timed Phrases, 11 ONR Technical Report,
                 SDC 411-1-5, 1949.
            3.   Black, J. W., "Exploratory Studies: The Relation between
                 Uncertainty and Vocal Inte2nsity, 11 ONR Technical Report,
                 SDC 411-1-6, 1949.
            4.   Black, J. W. , "The Intensity of Oral Responses to Stimulus Words,
                 THE JOURNAL OF SPEECH AND HEARING DISORDERS, XIV,
                 March 1949.
            5.   Black, J. W., "Loudness of Speaking: The Effect of Heard Stimuli
                 of Low Intensity, 11 JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY,
                 XI, June 1949.
            6.   Black, J2. W. , "Natural Frequency Duration and Intensity of Vowels
                 in Reading, 11 THE JOURNAL OF SPEECH AND HEARING DISORDERS,
                 XIV, 3, September 1949, 216-221.
            7.   Black, J. W. , "The Effect of Room Characteristics upon Vocal
                 Intensity and Rate, " JOURNAL OF THE ACOUSTICAL SOCIETY OF
                 AMERICA, 21, 1950, 174-176.
            8.   Black, J. W. , "Some Effects upon Voice of Hearing To2nes of
                 Varying Frequency and Intensity while Reading, 11 BuMed Research
                 Project Report No. NM 001064. 01. 01, U. S. Naval School of
                 Aviation Medicine, Pensacola Florida, January 1950.
                 1. Other reports from this same project include:
                 A.  Accompaniments of Word Intelligibility.
                 B.  Adaptation to Delayed Side-Tone.
                 C.  The Effect of Delayed Side-Tone upon Vocal Rate 4and Intensity.
                 D.  The Effect of Noise-Induced Temporary Deafness upon Vocal
                     Intensity.
                 E.  Formal Spoken Vocabulary of College Students.
                 F.  The Intrinsic Intensity of Oral Phrases.
                                                 (continue at top of next page)
                                                39 -

                G.  Intelligibility of Speech Heard at High Altitude and Sea Level.
                H.  The Pressure in the Oral Cavity in the Production of
                    Consonants.
                I.  Some Influences of Delayed Side-Tone upon Intelligibility.
                J.  Some Physiological Accompaniments of Speaking.
                K.  A Study of Vocal Responses during Controlled Aural
                    Stimulation.
             9. Black, J. W. . "A Compensatory Effect in Voca2l Responses to Stimuli
                of Low Intensity, 11 JOURNAL OF  EXPERIMENTAL  PSYCHOLOGY,
                XI, June 1950, 396-397.
           10.  Black, J. W., "The Effect of Delayed Side-Tone upon Vocal Rate
                and Intensity, 11 THE JOURNAL OF SPEECH AND HEARING DISORDERS,
                16, March 1951, 56-60.
           11.  Brubaker, R. S. , "An Experimental Investigation of Speech
                Disturbance as a Function of t2he Intensity of Delayed Auditory
                Feedback, 11 Ph. D. Thesis, University of Illinois, 195Z.
           1 2. Davis, Hallowell, et al., HEARING AND DEAFNESS, New York,
                Murray Hill Books, Inc., 1947.
           13.  Draegert, G. L. , "Relationships between Voice Variables and
                Speech Intelligibility in High Level Voice, 11 SPEECH MONOGRAPHS,
                November 1951, 272-278.
           14.  Dunn, H. K. and Wh2ite, S. D. , "Statistical Measurements on
                Conversational Speech, 11 THE JOURNAL OF THE ACOUSTICAL
                SOCIETY OF AMERICA, II, January 1940, 278-288.
           15.  Egan, J. P. , "Articulation Testing Methods II, 11 OSRD Report
                3802, 1944. (Office of Technical Services Report PBL 22848)
           16.  Fairbanks, Grant, "VOICE AND ARTICULATION DRILLBOOK.
                New York, Harper and Brothers, 1940.
 2          17.  Fairbanks, G. and Hoaglin, M. W., "An Experimental Study of the
                Durational Characteristics of the Voice during the Expression of
                Emotion," SPEECH MONOGRAPHS, VIII, 85-90, 1941.
           18.  Fairbanks, G. , House, A. S. , and Stevans, E. L.; "Experimental
                Study of Vowel Intensities, 11 JOURNAL OF THE ACOUSTICAL
                SOCIETY OF AMERICA, XXII, 4, July 1950, 457-459.
       6    19.  Fairbanks, G. and Jaeger, R. P. , "A Device for Continuous
                Variable Time Delay of Headset Monitoring during Magnetic
                Recording of Speech, 11 THE JOURNAL OF SPEECH AND  HEARING
                DISORDERS, 16, 1951, 162-164.
                                          - 40

           20.  Fletcher, Harvey, SPEECH AND HEARING, New York, D. Van
                Nostrand, 1929.
           21.  Fletcher, H. andmunson, W. A., "Loudness: Its Definition,
                Measurement and Calculation, 11 JOURNAL OF THE ACOUSTICAL
                SOCIETY OF AMERICA, VI, 1933,  82-108.
           22.  Fletcher, H. and Galt, R. H. . "The Perception of Speech and
                Its Relation to Telephony, 11 JOURNAL OF THE ACOUSTICAL
     2           SOCIETYOFAMERICA,  22,  1950,  89-151.
           23.  French, N. R. andsteinberg, J. C., "FactorsGoverningthe
                Intelligibility of Speech Sounds, 11 JOURNAL OF THE ACOUSTICAL
                SOCIETY OF AMERICA, 1947, 19,  90-119.
           24.  Guttman, N. , "An Analysis of Articulation as a Function of
                Delayed Auditory Feedback, 11 M. A. Thesis, University of
                Illinois, 195 1.
    2       25.  Hall, M., "Auditory Factors in Functional Articulatory Speech
                Defects, 11 JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL EDUCATION, 7, 1938,
                110-132.
           26.  Hull, F. M., -'An Experimental Investigation of Speech Disturbance
                as a Function of Frequency Distortion of Delayed Auditory Feedback,
                Ph. D. Thesis, University of Illinois, 1952.
           27.  Huntington, D. A. , "An Experimental Investigation of the Rela2tion-
                ships between Auditory Abilities and the Speech Disturbances
                Produced by Delayed Auditory Feedback, 11 Ph. D. Thesis, University
                of Illinois, 1952.
           28.  Inbau, Fred E., LIE DETECTION AND CRIMINAL INTERROGATION,
                Baltimore Maryland, The Williams & Wilkins Co., 1948.
           29.  Inbau, F. E., SELF-INCRIMINATION: WHAT CAN AN ACCUSED
                PERSON BE COMPELLED T2O DO, Springfield Illinois, Charles
                C Thomas, 1950.
           30.  Jordan, E. P., "A Comparative Investigation of Impromptu Speaking
                and Oral Reading under Conditions of Delayed Auditory Feedback,
                M. A. Thesis, University of Illinois, 1952.
           31.  Kryter, K. D., "The Effects of Noise on Man, 11 THE JOURNAL OF
                SPEECH AND HEARING DISORDERS, Mon. Supp. 1, 1950.
                                  2         41

             32.  Lee, B. S., "Some Effects of Side-Tone Delay, 11 JOURNAL OF
                  THE ACOUSTICAL SOCIETY OF AMERICA, 22, 1950, 639-640.
             33.  Lee, B. S., "Effects of Delayed Speech Feedback, 11 JOURNAL
                  OF THE ACOUSTICAL SOCIETY OF AMERICA, 22, 1950,
                  824-826.
             34.  Lewis, D. and Tiffin, J., "A Psychophysical Study of Individual
                  Differences in Speaking Ability, 11 ARCHIVES OF SPEECH,
                  Vol. I, No. 1, January 1934, 43-60.
             35.  Lightfoot, C. M., "Rate of Speaking: I. Relationship between
                  Original and Repeated Phrases, 11 ONR Technical Report SDC
                  411-1-1, 1948.
             36.  Lightfoot, C. and Morril, S., "Loudness of Speaking: The
                  Effect of the Intensity of the Side-Tone upon the Intensity of the
                  Speaker, 11 Joint 2Report No. 4, BuMed Research Project No.
                  NM 001 053, U. S. Naval School of Aviation Medicine, Pensacola
                  Florida, September 1949.
             37.  Marple, N. B. IV, and Morril S. N., "A Device for the
                  Production of Delayed Side-Tone, " U. S. Naval School of
                  Aviation Medicine, Joint Report No. 8, BuMed Research
                  Project No. NM 00 1064. 0 1, August 195 1.
           2  38.  Snidecor, J. C., "Comparative Study of Pitch and Duration
                  Characteristics of Impromptu Speaking and Oral Reading,
                  SPEECH MONOGRAPHS, 10, 1943, 50-55.
             39.  Stevans, S. S. and Davis, H., HEARING, New York, John Wiley
                  and Sons, Inc., 1938.
             40.  Tiffany, W. R. and Hanley, C. N., "Delayed Speech Feedback
                  as a Test for Auditory Malingering, " SCIENCE, 2115, 195Z, 59-60.
             41.  Terman, L. A. and Merrill, M. A., MEASURING INTELLIGENCE,
                  New York, Houghton-Mifflin Co., 1937.
                                                42

