                                                                                      LEX KY- 477
                                    FED:ERAL SECURITY AGENCY
                                        PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE
                                         LEXINGTON. KENTUCKY
        tM   ftgPtYtHO. ACONCSS Tmg          3 Ausus t   1953
      POSUC IFULTH SERVICE OSPtTAk
   NIW,Add it2t ion   Research Center
         - - -----------
                1: feel  sure you   will  be  interested   to  learn that   we  were
                  -te to begin-'         pertments. witir  LSD-25 during    the   month
                ab               our ex
                of July.    We  obtained   5 subje'cts who agreed to      take  the drug
                chronically,    -All of these were negro male patients          and all
                of  them  Phystcally  were   In   very   excellent   shape.   The   time
                so far has be-'en spent exclusively in obtaining control data
                which includes physica'l andl;otychiatri-c examinations   Rorschach
                and Goldsteln-Schere.r' tests, Minnesota hiultiphasic Personality
                -Inve2ntories,   ele-efroincephatogram3,,,   steadiness   test.,    blood
                chemistries  and   ham@a,@'ology.  Wii s.hotild be In position to
                begin exploratory st@odies designed'tid deter.-nine the minimal
                effective dose for each ma@n -e-a'rly in August.
                Arrangementi have been made wi,th       th2e-Sandoz    Company to obtain
                a supply of the drug.
                The behavior of the Patient$  In       our ward   has  been disappoint-
                ingly qu,iet'. All five of the men haye been extremely @uict,
                agreeable and@polite with each other  the osychiatric aides.
                and the doctors.     They. definifeli,- are more-rese2-ved than        wc
                expecied and we have a distinct iceling that th;y are somewhat
                afraid., most especially of     t.')-e physicians@ Involved-.   We have
                made a strenuous effort to      break through this barrier but
                hav@,,- -succ-@!eded ..on ly -part i'a Ity-o'  -  The  relstions@l' 2 with 4.,hc
                                                                         p
                Ps-ichiatric aides.,  who  4ctuail',-y  will  be  the  key  observers.,
                Is  bi'coming  somewhat  more  free  and  easy;  but   the-degree   of'-
                rapport  :ffained  sofar  Is   not   nearlyso   great   as   we   expect
                with  white  subjects.  Reserve  and   la2ck   of   rapport   with   the
                physicians   are-as   great   as   iiltially.   In   all   probability,
                this type of behavior is to. be expected        with patients of
                this type.  Perhaps the drug will break down some of the
                barriers.
                                                   @-,y -1@074-15
                                        c!a'La -     FEB 7977

                                                                          page,2
                         -o
               I haic, a Is heard that   the 'Alcomet r,  has  been   repaired
               and Is being  shipped..   If no   particular difficulties    are
               experien,ced In the, LSD  experiment, this-will   enable  us to.
               begin preliminary work    with alcohol some  time  during   the
2               fill.
               Experiments  with I-N-allytnor   Dromoran and the 3-meth I
                                                                          y
               ether  of   N-allylnor Dromoran are not encouraging.  Both
               compounds  produce  deftnite-subjecf.ive  effects  when   given
               orally.. The margin however appears to@be quite small.
               Total doses of 7.5 mg,, orally   sel2dom cause any perceptible
               ef fe cts.  Doses  of  10  mg..orally  al.most invariably do, but
               concomitantly,, disturbing.  toxic  effects, c,hiefty of vasovagal
               tYPC3 (marked,,perspiration  dizziness on    standing,-weakness
               and drop In blood pressure) are observed  and these toxic
               effects definitely Interfere with the elicitation of
               "dep2ressed'  material  from  the   patients.
                                    Very sincerely yours,
                                                    M*Do
                                    Ha:rr is IsbeiI
                                    D'irector of   Research
               H  r n
                                              i,i p ri b,, 187,175@
                          7                        4 C;rp lq77

