          STA:IDARD FORM  NO.
           Office i'dei;zoyaiidiii;z                      UNITED STATES  GOVERNMENT
          TO          f,i le                                                  DATE:     Decpnt@,er   1951
          FRQM                           14
          SUBJECT: carbon Dioxide Therapy, Possible "Artichoke" Use
                          1.   Reference is made to a book  entitle2d  C;,EE(@)i@T  L)IOXIDE  T14FRAPY  by
                      L. J. I-lediin.,i, M. D., Professor of              University of Illinois
                      College of Medicine, Chic.ago, Illinois.
                          2 .  'nii-s book sfi,s ibrt,h the  treatment  of  certain  ty-@ies  of  nervous
                      di-8orderq or p5@,chol)2atliie coiidit,ions by  the  use  of  carbon  dioxide  (CO2)
                      mixed  with  oxygen.  Di-.  Meduni  has  set  forth  in  thi3  book  his  techniques
                      in the administration of carbon dioxide treatment on-        certain types of
                      mental patients and,  in  general,  it  may  be  sta.fed  that  he  uses,  for  medi-
                                        1  2                   0
                      cal purpos-es, 30,'@" CC)2 mixed with 70/' oxygen.  Dr. i,tediiiia uses this mixture
                      by straight cor-mei-c@-al purchase  of  the  mixed  gao  in  Chicago  which  he  buys
                      for approximately 1;"9.75  a  tank  full.  This  gas  comes  in  tanks  whicii  con-
                      tain 12400 gallons of gas under about 1800 pounds pressure and is delivered
                      4.
                      L'o  the  patients  through  two  manometers  into  a  standard  breathing  bag,  gas
                      inhalin2 device.
                          3.  Accordinr,  to  Dr.  Meduna,  the  inlialation  of  thi-5  mixture   rapidly
                      Induces unconsciousness in a p--ttient.  2   Thi,,:; is hel-d for -? mi.t,ter of a.
                                                             -,d  and  the  patient  then  regains  full
                      few seconds when the ma,sk i,,  remove
                      consci(nisness throligh a so c,4.lled "transitional" period.  Alnparently
                      diirino, this trinsitional period, Dr.,'Mfduna questions the pa2tient and
                      also at  this  time  the  patients  talk  'over  or  tell  about  their  experiences
                      in the sense of a psychie,tric treatment.
                               This book indicates that by the       use  of  a  C02  dosare,  many  in-
                      dividiials  have  talked  at  great  lengths  of  their  past,  revealed  intiniate
                      secret3., abreacted, etc., etc. and  becaus2e  of  this,  Dr.  ?@Ipciiini  has  ap-
                      parently )cliieved gome excellent results in treating certain mental
                      conditi-ons.
                          5.   Although  C02  treatments  appa.rently   produce   intense   dreams,   hal-
                      lucinitions to i. certain extent and  @i  deiire  and  willine.-ne-qs  to  tal2k,  the
                      writer is dollbtftll. if  this  C02  treatment  could  he  applied  to  "Artic@ioke"
                      tinlr@ss it was applied after the iri(lividi),il had I-,ef-n r(,ndered  uncongciolls,
                      since the treatmerit irivolves the use  of  a  gas  mask  ird  cuin'@ersome  equi-p-
                      ment.  iiowever, it. might be of ii@i.eregt to exanitie t.hi.s t,,@chn-iqiie  with
                      tli(-- vi-w towai,(] fil-I.ing an air-proof room with a siniil,-ir crss mixture
                      (30" C02--70@, oxycen).

                        6   The book does not indicate any extensive use of hypnosis or
                  auto-silggestion in connection with the C02 treatments or the use of
                  C02 as a means of gaining hypnotic control.
                        7.  In connection with the above, it might be possit-le to tl,?',re C02
                  experiments conducted a.lonf,- with experirrients on low o2yygen content or
                  high and low pressures in airtight rooms.
                        8.  It is suggested that      -a@i@@nformat,ion be made available
                  to the medical st-aff (pprhaps               Or to
                  a future discussion with.' edi afow'@@
                                             in  C    r psychiatric consultaiits of thi7s
                  Agency.
                        9.  The took, CAPPON DIO:(LDE I'liERA.FY, apparently cirle from the Army
                  t-ledical Library at Wa3hinF-,ton, D. C., and the library number is QV 3iLt
                  M493C 1950.

