                                                                         it@ September 1970-
                    Dear
                         official action on the contract should be c=pleted wltliin the next
                    week. This will be  followed  by  contract  ne-OtLation  with  your  organizati=
                                                                 c@
                    ii,hich 2can be accomplished within a few days.
                         The clearance on         jis almost complete, and ha  should  be  available
                    for work by the tim ffe administrative matters have been settled.  Hot-mvert
                    there are some details re*ardin- his association with the project that 1
                                              12    a
                    wo2uld lil,,.e to discuss with you.
                         Under seoarate cover I am for-.,Yarding various technical  reports  and
                    miscellaneous material I have accumulated in the  general  area  of  non-letl;al
                    incapacitation. It is not or-anized  in  any  particular  fashion  but  does
                    Drovide some of the bacl-.Cround information in the area.  Perhaps it t4ould
                    @e best for you to screen the publications prior to =akin- it available to
                                                                                C,
                             I would like the =terial returned  when  it  has  served  its  purpose.
                    'Me literature dealirta with electric shock is rather s arce.  I borrowed
                                                                           2  p
                    a copy of the "Proceedin-s of  the  International  Symposium  an  Electrical
                                             a
                    Accidents" which I must return.  However,  I  have  enclosed  the  reference
                    information for your librarian.  If you are not able to obtain a copy,
                    let me lcncn;.
                         As you suc,,6-asted during our last meeting, as s1oon as the administrative
                    matters are co.,apleted I will visit i-iith you and your staff to  establish
                    an experi=ntal pro-r= which is realistic in ta=as of the breadth of
                                        0
                    subject matter and contractual restraints.
                                                          Sincerely,

