                                                             25 September 1968
                    @LE@IORANDLTII FOR:
                    SUBJECT          Meeting with Dr.
                         1.  As I mentioned.t.o ygu-earlier this week I had
                    conversations at Mr.         .1 frequest with Dr..'
                            Iconcerning-animal training.  In going over my
                    notes from the trip, I f2ound some things I didn't mention
                    to you; therefore, I'll-summarize my meeting with him in
                    this  memo.
                         2.  As you will recall,.               done guided
                    animal work on donkey-j and rats.., He said that in doing
                    his literature search on the project, he came across work
                    done in Sweden  in World War II in which seals were trai7ned
     2               to attach exvlosives to submarines.  He recalled that the
                    harness for @he seal had' been one of the main problem
                    areas,  Further, he said dogs had been trained in World
                    War I to go to tanks for a  food  reward.
                         3.  In his own work w-Lth donkeys and rats, he found
                    the following using electrical stimulation of the brain:
                              a)  negative reinfor2cement in'all cases caused
                         panic reaction and  was  not  useful
                              b)  an  intermediate  level@bra-in stimulation was
                         the only useful one (you could overdo the'pleasure
                         reaction)
                              c)  with rats the attention s]@an was so short
                          (less than 1 sec.), that you needed to give
                          immediate reinforcement (2less than I sec.).  By
                          doing th is you could train the rat in less than 10
                          minutes.

                        SUBJECT:  Nleetina with Dr.
                                 d)  for guidance he needed a "logical and" in.
                             the circuitry, i.e., the animal must have the right
                             heading and have forward motion
                                 e)  a maximum response rate ;t 60-100 eps  for
                             the donkey
                                 f) the animal gives the response you  ask  2for
                             and not necessarily what you want or expect,  thus
                             your questions to it must be framed very carefully.
                             4.  While preparing to get into the animal work, Dr.
                                 spent 2 weeks with'    lw'ith a grain 'of sal't'
                        He realizes you must take
                        but while he was at the,
                        was convinced of the following:
            2                     a)        i@@@d found'pleasure centers in the
                             brain               land could stimulate them by
                             electrical shodk"
                                                                       - - --------
                             5.  I'm sure you would find Dr.         ivery
                        stimulating.  'The next time he is in town, I  hope.that
                        you can find t2ime to have some discussions with him.
                                                     2

