                                                          April Z6, 1966
                         Dear Dr.
                                 The program to  evaluate  various  electrical  combinations  for  their
                         potential for producing anesthesia  has  been  designed  and  is  enclosed.  An
                         effort has been made to include  as  many  of  the  parameters  we  prev-ionsly
                         discus&ed and work out the details  as  soon  as  possible.  After  your  review
                         of the progralm, deletions or additions can be made if necessary.
                                 This study does not go into the specific details of the basic principles
                         as much as I would like to investigate at some time. I think  it  best  to  look
                         at that phase of study after we complete this study and know the current
          2               combination that gives the best results.  I would anticipate doing some
                         microelectrode work for more specLfic information on the amount of current
                         in specific brain area3 at a later date.
                                 I will complete r-iy training program -,t                   Thi  s  wiU
                         work very well with yot, July I - June 30 fiscal year.     I had 2anticipated
                         being committed until S,@pternber 1, but have been able  to  arrange  to  start
                         on this prograni July Ist instead.
                                 One part of the budget was  somewhat  uricartain.  This  is  in  regard
                         to the i--istitutional ove."head.  After checking with the people at      II
                         find that the overhead charges are 2019 on N. 1. H. or N. S. F. type  grants  or
                         40'Yo of salaries on other t7ypes. Since you mentioned a  number  of  groups  in
                         Washington were interested in the program. I have assumed that a.Ll involved
                         fit into the same bracket.

                                                              2                     April Z6. 1966
                               Our plans are to devote full time to this program.  The only exception
                         to this for which I would like approval is to spend 9-17. days per year to pro-
                         vide tha necessary surgical and anesthetic procedures for the kidney transpla-YAt
                               -n at the
     2                    progra.
                                                I Electroanesthesia is used in these procedures on tw:bi
                         calves and the very valuable data on electreanesthesia in twins of known corii-
                         patibility would be included in the reports. No grant funds from the
                         program would be iised in the ki4ney program.
                                In discussing the anest2hesia program with Dr.          it was of con-
                         siderable interest to note the suggested possibility of hi@man application after
                         completion of the animal program.  1 felt you would like to know of this in the
                         event it is desirable to co-ordinate a human experimental program at a later
                         date.
                                Let me know if I need to make any changes in the prog2ram enclosed.
                         I am looking forward to getting started on our program and see if we can't
                         find out what the potential of electroanesthesia really is.
                                Thank you for your continued interest.
                                                                   Your s truly,
                         Enclosure
                                                                                    ^--47 -4*

                                         PROJECT PROPOSAL
                Title:  "Effects of Combinations of Waveforms and Frequencies of Electrical
                         Currents Applied to the Head to Produce Anes:he3ia"
                Inve s tig ator
                Department and Location:
                Director:
                objectives and Procodures:
                1.    Determination of the most effective combinations af electrical current
2                      producinz,r anesthesia
                      A.  Combinations of  sine, saw tooth, square, triangle, white noise,
                          pulse D,, C. and D.C. signals will be employe:i in combinations to
                          achieve this objective.  Both two and three wave combinations Will
                          be employed with variable frequencies.  Bas@d on the published
                          experience 2of others and my own personal experience, it is not
                          anticipated that anesthesia wi-U be produced by all currents.  Some
                          will produce convulsions, tonic muscle spasms, and/or respiratory-
                          cardiac distress without anesthesia.  From published data, these
                          complications have been more evident with certain waveforms and
                          cu.rzent combinations than with othe2rs.  This sttidy proposes to de-
                          termine in a systematic fashion which wave-forms and frequency
                          c,omt>inations produce acceptable anesthesia with minimal undesirable
                          side effects.  Tne equipment has been desigr* d to permit invest7i-
                          gation df over two hundred combinations of waveforms and frequencies
                          which will be rated ac2cording to desirable and undesirable charac-
                          teri,stics produced.
                      B.  Cornbination waves  will be applied to the head by two techniques:
                          1.   Summation of the current before it enters the head.
                               (Two eleclrodes-Americ&n technique)
                          2.   Summaticn of the current in the head.  (Your and six electrode
                       7        combinations with separate leads to the generators producing
                               the combination-Russian technique).
                          Combinations of waveforms and frequencies which are obviously
                          not satisfactory due to severe respiratory or circulatory distress,
                          convulsions, cardiac difficulties or other unforeseen problems will
                          be recorded as such, and will not be evaluated more extensively.

                                          .. ..... .....
                                                             2
                                 Combinations which show promise for'anesthesia will be evaluated
                                 further as outlined in objective 11.
                              Ti@e effect of anesthetic currents on resplr    circulation and depth
                                                            2           ±tion,
                              of anesthesia
                              When a combination of electrical currents appears to have potential as
                              an anesthetic agent. the following procedures will be followed.  Pre-
                              anesthet:%; measurement of all pertinent parameters will be made (see
                              ty-pica.1 experimen-@ below).  The cardiac an:i respirato y al2terations
                              will be monitored during and after induction.  If successful, a surgical
                              procedure will be carried out to evaluate the effectiveness of the com-
                              bination of current to produce anesthesia and muscle relaxation.  Since
                              it is possible with electrical current to pro<iuce satisfactory anesthesia
                              in portions of 2the body wblile inadequate in others, six locations will be
                              considered for surgical procedures (simple cut down).  These are bead,
                              neck, limbs, bones or skin, thoracic, urogenital, superficial abdomwal,
                              and deep abdominal.  Monitoring wiU continue during surgical procedures.
                              After operation, current wi-1-1 be shut off ar-d the recove2ry behavior noted.
                              Blood s am ple s will b e dr awn b ef o r e, dur ing and af te r ane s the s i a ar4 the
                              recovery pattern of cardiac and respiratory chalnges will be followed for
                              24 hours.  Blood pressure measurement will be made by direct canr%ula-
                              ti-on of the femoral artery and this will per-rnit m2onitoring of heart rate
                              ag well.  Respiration will be measured by pneurnograph and Lead U of
                              the electrocardiogram will be monitored before and after application of
                              the current.
                              Dogs will not receive muscle relaxants nor oxygen nor wiU they be
                              intubated.  These will be deliberately avoided so that muscle activity
              2                and respiratory depression may be observed, when they occur.  This
                              al so a]-lows a full response to pain during ;urgery if there is insufficient
                              anesthesia.
                              Determination of the total am eraee of each combination and correlation
                              with effectiveness in producing anesthesia
                              -Lhis will be done to determine the2 cornbin-ation requiring minimal currexit
                              f-or anesthesia.  The current and voltage will be measured with a milliam-
                              meter aiid a true r. m. s. voltmeter.  The wavef orms will be monitored
                              with an oscilliscope and the waveform combinations will be photographed
                              from the scope to record them accurately.  Measurement equipment wiil
       1                       be attached to the anesthesia generator output.

                                                                 3
                         IV.   Determination of the lishape" of the electrical field produced by the
                               Current combination
                               This will be determined by connecting the recording equipment to
                               implanted macroelectrodes and is designed to indicate the disiribution
                               of the curren@2. within the brain and its intensity. For this study,  six
                               chronic electrodes will be placed in selected locations -within the brain.
                               Dogs will then be subjected to currents of waveform and frequency
                               combinations known to produce anesthesia.  Recordings will be made
                               usiz,.g the same equipment required in Section LIL
                            2   These dogs will be used only to measure the shape of the electrical
                               f-',eld. Since these dogs can be used repea@,edly, we plan to keep  five
                               dogs with chronically implanted electrodes  at  &U  times.  The  use  of
                               these saxne animals for s--veral combinations of currents will reduce
                               the error in measurement between anima2ls.
                               These dogs wiu'be prepared early during :he period required to obtain
                               the necessary equipment and personnet to initiate the other aspects of
                               the project.  MetaUic-nylon electrodes wiU be implanted through
                               sm&U trephines in  the  sk-uu  during  general  anesthesia.  The  micro-
                           2    manipulator will be used for positioning electrodes with neurosurgic@a
                               assistance.
                         V.    Typical Experimen      Planned technique fcr evaluation of each combi-
                               r3 ation
                               A,   Waveform combination and frequency will be selected and equip-
                                    ment adjusted for operation.
                                           2                   ents will be made on normal glnimals:
                                    The following measurem
                                    1.   Heart r#.e- and ECO.
                                    2.   Respiratory rate.
                                    3.   Rectal ternp@r ature.
                                    4. - Arterial blood gases  (PCOZ, pO?) and pH.
                          2          5.   Notation of general physical condition, activ-ity and alertness'.
                               C,   Animal will then be prepared for application of carrent.
                                    1.   Preparation of electrode sites (Bitemporal or frontal-occipital).
                                    2.   Cannulation of femoral artery wi@-h local anes  esta.
                                    3.   Placement of electrod8es (electrode will be needle or plate
                                         depending on D.C. or A. C. operation).

                                                                 4
                                 D.  Connect leads and apply current.
                                    1.  Record response (muscle movements, struggling, excitement,
                                        salivation, etc.).
                                    2.  Monitor blood pressure, cai@diac rate and respiratory rate.
                                    3.  Sample arterial blood for P2CO2, PO?, pH when induction is
                                        completed or abandoned.
                                 E. Determine depth of anesthesia by tail clamping, corneal reflexes,
                                    swallowing reflexes.  If no anesthesia, abandon.
                                    If anesthesia present, proceed to cut downs at various sites.
                                    Monitoring wiU continue throughout operation.  Responses to
                     2               incision in various areas and manipulatiou will be noted.
                                 G. Risponse to removal of current from the head wiU be recorded
                                    and all parameters remeasiared.
                                 H. Twelve and 24-hour post-operative observations will be made.
                                 L  Determination of the current and voltage levels will be made after
                             2       induction, during operation, and just prior to termination of current
                                    application.
                                 T. If satisfactory anesthesia obtained, shape of electrical field will  be
                                    determined in. dogs with chronically implanted electrodes.
                                 The number of comoinations  of  currents  and  waveforms  to  be  evaluated
                                 and the need f2oi- aumbers of animals sufficient for proper statistical
                                 analysis make it necessary to use a large number of dogs.  Each dog
                                 Will be used as extensively is possible and yet yield accurate results.
                                 It is anticipated that SrCnO 105ses by death wiU occur, especially since
                                 many current combinations have never be:fore been attempted.  Whe2n
                                 possible, dogs will be reused as often as practical.  To obtain a
                                 defwtive answer for each current we believe 4 dogs must be studied
                                 before abandoning the comblnatioa. Com:)inations which give promise
                                 of satisfactory anesthesia will be studied more extensively whene@er
                                 indicated.
                      2           Responses noted during the entire procedure  will  be  recorded  in  terms
                                 of depth of anesthesia and duration of current application.
                                 The investigator and technicians will spend full time on the  project  and
                                 will have no other activities.  A two-year period is considered the
                                 minimal time to complete the program.  It is anticipated that tw0o months
                                 will be required to assemble the equipment and personnel necessary f,)r
                                 fuU scale operation.

                                                              5
                                              Illustratiori of the Method of
                                          Determining Waveforrn Combinations
                    Waveforrns
                          A,   S' ne                            E.    Random or Vniite Noise
                          B.   Square                           F.    D. C.
                          C .  Tr2iangle                         0.    D. C. pulse
                          D.   Saw Tooth
                    Combinations
                    A+A        Bts      (@ +C      D+D          E+9            F+F        G+G
                    A+B        B+C      C+D        D+E          E+F            F+G
                    A+C        B+D      C+E        D+F          E +G
                    A.tD      3 B+E      C+F        D+G
                    A+E        B+F      C+G
                    A+F        B+G
                    A+G
                                    ill be summated before and after entering head.  Frequencies
                    Combinations w
                    will also be varied.  The same system will be used for determining triple
                    waveform combinations.

                                                              6
                                                          BUDGE T
                    PERSONNEL SALARIES
                          Investigator.. ........... Full Time ..............
                          Technicians (2)
                          1.    Assisting with animal procedures
                                Anesthesia and S-argery
                          Z.    Laboratory Anal2ysis
                                (Blood gases, etc. )
                          Secretary - part time (5001*)
                                                      Total
                    ANII,@P,y  S
                          500 dogs @        each
                          Board - 5 dogs for 365 days @ . 60/day
                               500 dogs for average of 3. 5 days @-. 60/dao
          2                                            Total
                    EQULPMENT
                          Components for Anesthesia Apparatus:
                          (1)  Harrison Lab. Model 865 C for D.C.
                          (2)  Universal Dynamics Electro-Thesis    D. C.
                               pulse generator
                          (3)  Hewlett-Packard Model 03380B Sine    Wave
                          (4)  Hewlett-Packard Model 330OA/3304
                               Function generator for triangle 4 sawtooth
                          (3)  General Radio Model 1390-B - (a component
                               for randorn noise)
                          (6)  Krohn-Rite Model 310-C - Tuncable filter for
                               producing ranges of random noise
                          (7)  Interconnecting cables, leads from generators
                               to anirna2ls, connected hardware, etc.
                                                     Sub Total
                          Recording Components:
                          (1)  OsciUiscope - To monitor waveforrns and observe
                               electrical field in head.  Hewlett-Packard Model
                               141 A with Differential Amplifier (1403A), Time
                               base 1420 A or equivalent
                          (2)  Oscillis0cope Carnera for recording waveforms
                               for records

                                                              7
                           (3) Milliarneter   To measure the current arplied to
                               head and also  in  brain
                           (4) True R. M. S. Voltmeter - To measure the true
                               R. M. S. current.  Gives information needed for
                               true electrical power applied to the head.
                           (5) Con2nections,    shipping Sub Total
                           Micromanipulator for positioning electrodes
                           Electrodes
                           Blood Gas Analysis Equipment:
                           (1)  Instrumentation Labs. NUcro Analysis Systern
                                   recomznended
                           (2)  Gases for Analysis Equipment
                           Surgical Supply Charges;
                       2        ilncludes instruxm nts, drapes, suture, related
                               surgical suppues. ) Charges are $       :Iset per
                               day.  It is planned to complete series procedures
                               on days of surgery for more efficienc,,r and economy.
                               We are capable of performing 12-14 surgical pro-
                               cedures for the purpose of2 evaluation of anesthetic
                               Levels in the various regions of the body/day.
                               Surgery is planned for 170 days.
                                                      Total
                    MISCELLANEOUS
                           Photography
                           Travel
                           Tubing, catheters, drugs
                                                      Total
                    INSTITUTIONAL OVERHEAD
        4                   401/o of Salaries
                                                      Grand Total   Ist Year

                                                      BUDGET      Znd Year
                       PERSONNF,L SALARIES
                             Investigator
                             Technicians
                             1.
                             2.
                             Secretarial Service    50'7o of Time
                                                         Total
                       ANIMALS
                             6200 dogs
                             Board
                                                         Total                               $
                       EQULPIVMNT
                             Replacements, extra cornponents for anesthbsia
                                equipment
                             Electrodes
                             Blood gas equipment, electrodes and gases
                             Surgical Sup@ply2,Charges
                                                         Total                               $
                       IVUSCELLANEOUS
                             Photography                                                     $
                             Travel
                             Drugs,  tubing,  small   equipment
                                                         Total
                       INSTITUTIONAL OVERHEAD
                             40% of Salaries                                                 $
                                                         Ora.nd Total  2nd Year              $

                     INTRODUCTION
                           A wide range of electrical waveforms have been used on many species
                     of animals and on man since l,e Duc I made his attempts to produce electro-
                     anesthesia in 1902.  The most common types of current used were either
                     direct current with DC pulses, square, triangle, sawtooth, or sine waveforms,
                     or combinations of these.  V@bite no2ise was also introduced in attempts to pro-
                     duce better aneithesia.  The principal responses de-tected by a number of
                     investigators dkiringthe past few years are included.  Examples of both desirable
                     and undesirable reactions observed are included.
                           Fabianz and Hardy7-9 did extensive animal studies and then attempted
                     human applications.  They used 700 cycle per se2cond sine wave and characteris-
                     ticauy produced strong tonic muscle contractions.  The most conspicuous
                     cardiovascular reaction was hypertension and tachycardia.  This was associated
                     with a rise in plasma catechol amine levels.  Prolc-nged electro-anesthesia had
                     little effect on the blood oxygen if the animal was weU ventilated.  A hyper-
                     gly2cemic response was recorded in animals subjec-.ed to clectro-anesthesia.
                            Creddes3, 4 reported on results in dogs and horses. Direct currert with
                     DC pulses was used and hypertension and poor muscle relaxation were charac-
                     teristics,  He observed cardiac and respiratory arrest in all cases.  This was
                     .temporary in most cases if the current levels were properly 4adjusted.  However,
                     in his report on applicatior.9 in horses, there was a 14 per cent rnortality rate
                     due tc- permanent respiratory arrest.  Salivation a-id hyperthermia were also
                     observed as undesirable side effects in dogs.

                             Gowing5, 6 reported no abnormalities in the electrocardiogram during
                      electro-anesthesia by DC-square wave current in dogs.
                             Herir,io evaluated the responses and current requirernents in dogs usilig
                      sine, square and triangle waveforms.  He concluded that sine wave applications
                      gave the least amount of unwanted side effects.  The hy-p2prtension during induc-
                      tion subsided as anesthesia progressed.  Hematologic studies befove, during
                      and after electro-anesthesia revealed no significant differences in blood clottir5g
                      tirne, packed cell volume, sedimentation rate, hemoglobin or differential white
                      blood cell count,
                                    it, 12
                  2           FIemrn       used square wave currents at frequencies up to I 100 c. p. s.
                      A relationship between the amount of current required and the frequency of the
                      current was observed in ap!>!:Lcations to cats.
                             K--iutsonl3-16 conducted most of his work with 700-1500 cycle per second
                      sine wave currents in dogs and man.  Hyperglycernia 2occurred during the pass-
                      age of electrical currents.  Knutson found no evidence c.,f brain damage from the
                      current levels used in his experiments, but cites work done by other investigatoys
                      with higher voltage le,.els which produced hemorrhages in the brain.  At the loswer
                      2.@@v@-Is of current ap?lication, tie principal daneer of brain cell damage w2as fron-I
                      inadequate oxygen, due to depression of the respiration by physical interference
                      from muscle contractions.  Knutson controlled convulsions by *.he use of muscle
                      relaxants or by adjustments in the current applied to the head.
                             Knutson found ttiat serum potassium, calcium, chloride and sodium did
                      not change during three hours of continuous electro-aresthesia.  Blood urea
                      nitr.ogen levels indicated a decrease in kidney function.

                            By using techniques of modern anesthesia. Knutson was able to eliminate
                     or modify the complication?g of cyanosis, bradycardia, cardiac irregularities
                     and severe muscle contractions.
                            Pricel7 reported muscle spasms, elevation in blood pressure and
                     tachycard---a as the principal disadvantages.  His experience indicalted 2that
                     children and elderly patients tolerated electro-anesthesia especially well.  The
                     responses to electro-anesthesia could indicate potential use in patients with low
                     blood pressure or bronchial infections, according t-o Price.  The wave form
                     used was sine wave at 700 cycles per second.
                            Po-wersl8, 44 reported diverse effects he observed in dogs using 700
    2                 c. p. 9. since wave current. Current of l'OO milliamperes for one-half hour pro-
                     duced increases in the hernatocrit unless dogs weri splenectomized.  A
                     significant increase in the myocardial contractile force was recorded using a
                     Walton-5zodie strain gauge sutured to the right ventricle and recorded on a
                     Model 5,c Grass polygraph.
                 2           Sancesl9-26 used rectangular electrical wa-.res and made studies oa-
                     conduction over cortical pathways.  Evoked potentials were recorded in
                     Macaque monkeys during   electro-anesthesia.  'Alith electrical stimulation of
                     the sciatic nerve, the evoked response recorded from the medial lemniscus
                     was minimally affected, that recorded from the nucleus ventralis posterior
           1          was moderately reduced in amplitude, while the evoked potential recorded
                     from the post central gyrus was abolished.

                                                             4
                             Srnith32-36 used a number of different currents in his research.  In
                      dogs subjected to 20 milliamperes of DC and 20-30 milliamperes of square
                      wave AC, there was a temporary but consistent c@ange in amplitude and
                      frequency of the EEG.  The post-electro-anesthesia EEG pattern returned to
                2      normal within 30 minutes.
                             Histo-pathology studies revealed no neuronal changes other than agonal
                      swelling, without areas pf hemorrhage or necrosis in the eight brains evaluatet3-.
                             In clinical studies on dogs, respiration was slowed, but the arterial
                      oxygen saturatior- did not fall below 91 per cent.  The pCO2 levels did not rise
                      abo2ve normal.  Body temperature rises were detected, but could be reduced if
                      the animal was not intubated and had the tongue exposed to the air.
                             Turbes37-39 used a variety of currents and studied the effects on th@
                      EEG, reflexes, pain and maintance of electro-anesthesia.  Slow induction was
                      found to give a more acceptable physiological state and thus give more reliable
                      r2esults for aU parz-rneters evali-,ated.  Fast inductions gave cardic-pulmonary
                      difficulties which were fatal if not treated promptly,.
                            Va,nHarreveld4O-43 using 60 cycle currents observed respiratory arrest
                      durirlg ingiuction with 300 milliamperes of current.  After this inilial period, he
                      reduced the current sufficient to restore respi4rati.c-n.  No mention was made of
                      the number of animals that had perma-nent respiratory arrest.  Increases in
                      blood pressure were observed.  The material published by Van Harreveld indi-
                      cated respiratory difficulties were present throughout his procedures.

                              Many of the difficulties reported with tle use of eiectro-anesthesia can
                      be controlled by the application of proper principles. as Knutson indicates.
                      Cardiac and respiratory difficulties will frequently occur if these are not
                      observed.
                              The two most important principles of salfe anesthesia which should be
                      observed during clectro-anesthesia are the maintenan@e of respiration and
                      circulat;.on.  Most of the problems encountered are related to one or both of
                      these systems.  Maintaining proper ventilation for appropriate oxygen supply
                      to the cells, adequate elimination of carbon dioxid-e and normal blood pH is
                      essential.  Equally important is the maintenance of a safe blood pressure,
                    2  sufficient cardiac output, and a proper blood supp:y to all vital body tissues..
                              It is important to consider the comfort of the patient and avoid undue
                      stress, injury and discomfort.  The anesthesia should be controlled to assure
                      adequate depth for the surgical procedures that are to be performed.
                              The conscientious anesthesiologist never relinquishes the immediate
                   2   care of his patient until he is certain that he is no longer needed for the
                      support of the patient's normal physiologic-.al sta*,e.  He is responsible, from
                      the administration of the preanesthetic drugs until the completion of the post-
                      anesthetic care, for the needs of his patient,' The investigator in electro-
                      anesthesia should be expected to maintain the same degree of 1responsibuity.
                      He must rnaintain a physiological state that is as rear normal as possible
                      throughout the application of the electrical currents for anesthesia.

                                                              6
                              Proper attention to the principles of anest--iesiology in the calf and
                      other &nimals has made it possible to produce adequate anesthesia for surgery
                      without cardiac and respiratory arrest and related difficulties.  Higher
                      frequencies are needed to eliminate these problems and applications need to
   2                   be made with a slower induction than routinely used by many investigators.
                              Investigations at Oak Ridge, Tennessee 27- 31 proved it was not necessa-r-y
                      to use techniques which interfer with the normal function of the animal.  These
                      applications of electrical anesthesia were sufficient to produce anesthesia for
                      surgery.  Later the same results were accomplished in other2 environments.
                      PURPOS.E OF THE PROPOSED RESEARCH PROC-RAM
                              Ntu--nerous invest,'-gators since 1902 have attempted to produce anesthi sia
                      with the use of electrical currents.  Many types of current and methods of
                      applying them have been tried,  Some of these have been moderately successful
                      in producing an anesthetic state.  Even with su2ccessful applications, however,
                      unwanted side-effects were usually prese--it and resulted from the application of
                      electrical current to the brain as a wholn.  Indiscriminate application of
                      electrical currents to the head accounted for the severe unwanted actions.
                              It is not known if electrical currents -sufficient to produce a@nesthesia can
                      be di6rected to specific areas of the brain through external electrodes.  Neither
                      do we know if this would eliminate all unwanted side-effects.  There is also a
                      lack of s-.ifficient evidence to distinguish between anesthesia and paralysis pro-
                      duced by electrical currents in animals.

                                                                             AMIN,,
                       Ask
                      qp
                                                           7
                            The uriderstanding of the mechanisms by which electro-anesthesia is
                     produced could make it possible for this rnethod o.' anesthesia to become
                     clinically acceptable.  Therefore. the propose-I p2r:)gram to determine the
                     inforrnatidn necessary to justify the extension of the use of electrical current
                     for clinical anesthesia is submitted.
                     OBJ'ECTIVES OF TH& PROPOSED RESEARCH PPOGRAM
                            The objectives of this proposal are to answer three major questions.
                            1.   Where does the current go when it is applied to the cranium?
                           2 2.   When is anesthesia present and at what depth?
                            3.   What are the undesirable side effects of various currents and can
                                 they be eliminated?
                     PROPOSED STUDIES TO ACHIEVE OBJECTRVES
                            1.   Electrical Mechanisms
                                 A.    Determination of the frequency response curves and the
                                       external impedance levels of cran2ium.
                                 B.    Determination of the degrees of linearity of these electrical
                                       respon-ses.
                                 C.    Determination of the impedance of the tissues of the brain.
                                 D.    Determination of tissue voltage levels in the brain.
                                 E.    Determination of the distributiorl of total electrical current
                                  1     in the cranium.

                                                                   8
                                     F.     Determination  of  the  convolution  of  dual  electrical   currents
                                            in the brain.
                                     0.     Determination of the role of the cerebral spinal fluid as a
                                            conductor of electrical currents.
                                     R.     Determination of the effects of induced brain lesions on the
                                            capability to produce electro-a-nesthesia.
                                     1.     Determination of methods to focus current to specific locatione;
                                            in the brain.
                              II.    Biological Responses
                                     A.     Determination of the level of anesthesia.
       2                              5.     Determination of the effect of electro-ar-esthesia on blood
                                            gases and blood pH.
                                     C.     Determination of  the  effect  of  electro-anesthesia  on  the  cir-
                                            culatory system, including blood glucose levels.
                        METI-IODS
                              1.     Animals to be Use2d
                                     A.     Calves.
                                     B.     Primates.
                                            The calf has  been  selected  as  the  experimental  animal  in  the
                                     initial studies.  Primates will be used after the evaluiltions are
                                     complete in the  calf.  For  this  purpos-e.  the  Rheus  monkey  and  th-e
                        5             Chimpanzee have been selected.
                                            In vitro studies will be done  on  cadaver  heads  of  calves,  pri-
                                     mates and humans in a related sequence to the in vivo studies.

                                                             9
                                 C.    Justificatioa of Animal Selection.
                                           The most repeatable results      the most stable level
                                       of anesthesia from the use of electrical currents have been
                                       achieved during bovine applicatio:ns.  There are specific
                                       prob2lems associated with each of the other species as
                                       experienced by this investigator in studies on horses. s@,,eep.
                                       pigs, dogs, cats, rabbits, rats, goats, and monkeys.  The
                                       most accurate informatior. on the mechanisms of clectro-
                                       anesthesia can be obtained from animals that respond most
                      2                 favorable to electrical currents.  Therefore. the calf was
                                       selected as the experimental animal for the first phase of
                                       the program.
                                           Calves are available in adequate numbers and the facilities
                                       for handling them are adequate.  Calves of a 175-200 pound
                                       weight range would be used.  Twenty2-five calves per year
                                       would be needed.
                                          Primates are considered essential to the program, after
                                       completion of calf studies, since the a-natomical structure of
                                       the head and the reactions io electro-anesthesia rnore closely
                                       resembles those of the human.  Thus a link betwee3n bovine
                                       and humar, applications is formed to more clearly define the
                                       mechanisms involved.

                                                             -10-
                               11.  Currents to be Used
                                    A.    Pulsed direct current with variable pulse duration, frequency
                                          of piilse and amplitude.
                                    B.    Sinusoidal alternating current with variable frequency and
                                          amplitude.
     2                               C.    Dual sinusoidal with summation in the generator.
                                    0.    Dual sinusoidal with summation in the head.
                                    E.    Justification of Current Selections.
                                              The review of the literat7ure reveals that by-pertension,
                                          cardiac and respiratory arrest and strong muscle contrac2tions
                                          can occur.  The cardiac and respiratory arrest can be perma-
                                          nent if the electrical currents are rlot properly applied.
                                          1.  Sinusoidal currents can be varied to produce a wide range
                                              et responses in the animal.  These i-nclude cle-.tro-sleep
                                           2   with high-frequency-low amperage, electro-anesthesia
                                              with mid-frequency and amperage, and electro-conv-,,tlsion
                                              with low-frequency-high amperage application.  Thus by
                                              adjustment of the relationships between currezit amplitude
                                              and frequency, the dlffere:nce s in responses of the electro-
                                              biological pa-ra=eters can be evaluated for the corresponding
                                              states of consciousness.

                                            2.    The sinusoidal waveform is a clean electrical
                                                  wave unlil,,e a number of other types, such as
                                                  square and triangle waves which are composed
                                                  of a number of sinusoidat waves at various
                                                  frequencies in 2the harrnc-nic mechanism.  There-
                                                  fore, less distortion should occur in sinusoidal
                                                  application-a.
                                             3.   Dual sinusoidal with summation  in  the  generator
                                                  produces superficial analgesia without  sufficient
                                                  depth in the deep tissues. It 2has the reverse  eifect
                                                  of single sinusoidal, therefore the response of the
                                                  rnechanisms involved are changed.
                                             4.   Dual sinusoidal with su.-nmation in the head is  a
                                                  technique that opens new  approaches  to  electro-
                                                  anesthesia.  As the2 two currents are brought
                                                  together inside the head, a number  of  possibilities
                                                  exist which affects the response to currenl.  If  the
                                                  p'nase angles are the same,  the  currents  wiU  com-
                                                  bine in a true sumrnatio-i.  However,  variatiors  in
                          5                        the relationqhip of phase angles of the applied
                                                  currents can cause summation at locations in the
                                                  brain and cancellations of the current in other
                                                  areas, -Thus if we can learn how to  control  this

                                                                  lz
                                                 rnechanist-n to focus the current to specific locations
                                                 in the brain rather than total brain stirnulation, many
                                                 of the unw"ted side effects could possibly be elimi-
                                                2 nated.
                                al. Methods to be used in each Proposed Study
                                     A.     General Statement for All Studies:
                                                 Statistical consultation will be obtained for aid in the
                                            design of experiments and in the evaluation of data gen-
                                            erated.
                                     B.     Specific Studies (E2lectrical)
                                            1.   Determination  of  the  frequency  response  curves
                                                 and external impedance levels of the cranium.  In
                                                 vitro studies will be made in  cadaver  calf  heads
                                                 and in vivo studies in calves  of  same  size.  The
                                                 technique to be used consists o2f:
                                                 a.   Applying electrodes to the head of the calf for
                                                      current application.  Both bitemporal and
                                                      a.nterior-posterior types are to be used.
                                                 b.   Placement of recording electrode by steroto)dc
                                                      adjustment into0 the tissues of the  cra-,iium.

                                                          -i3
                                                    Electrodes can be adjusted for depth and
                                                    location in the tissues from skin levels to
                                                    the dura mater.  Trephine openings in the
                                                    skull will be made.
                                               c.   Connect2 anesthesia-current generator in
                                                    series with animal head aad impedance  bridge
                                                    for input.
                                               d.   Connect out-out of impedance bridge and re-
                                                    cording electrode in head in series to the
                                                    oscilliscope.
                                           2    e.   Current is applied through the head at desig-
                                                    nated frequencies and amperage  and  recorded
                                                    on oscilliscope, The same current is  applied
                                                    through the irnpeda-ice bridge and it is adjusted
                                                    to give same output to the scope.  The impedance
                          2                          levels ga the bridge then correspond to those of
                                                    the animals head.  Thus the total impedance met
                                                    by the current applied through external electrodes
                                                    is determined.
                                               i.   By determining the impedance of the head  and
                                                    9knowing the current input to the head, the current
                                                    flow in the brain can be determined.
                                               g.   By adjusting the frequencies and amplitude in an
                                                    interval method. the response curves can be

                                                            14
                                               determined.  ;ive milliampere and 100 cycles
                                               per second or pulses per second intervals wiU
                                               be used at ranges up to 2000 cycles per second.
                                               Above this, 500 cycles per second intervals will
         2                                      be used.
                                      2.   Determination of the degree of linearit7y of these electrical
                                           responses.  This study is closely associated with
                                           Study A.  It does not require additional measurements,
                                           but a mathamatical analysis &nd.graphing of the responses
                                           exhibit2ed for frequency and impedance to determine the
                                           degree of linearity of the system.
                                       3.  Deterrnination of the impedance of the tissues of the brain.
                                                                                 54, 55           s6
                                           a.   Theory:  Investigations by AArey        Nicholson
                                     2               57        58, 59, 60                   62
                                                RaU   , Ranch          ,and van Harreveld     illustra!,t*-
                                                the variations in impedance levels in the segments of
                                                the brain and changes that take place under changing
                                                behavi'or patterns.  Willen2k-iu 65 found that'the impeda@nce
                                                levels in the brain stem changed in relation to the
                                                level of anesthesia from methoxyflurane.  Since'the
                                                brain and surrounding tissues behave like a series of
                                                paraue"& resistors and capicators, it is reasonable to
             3                                   theorize that the impedance responses will vary in
                                                relation to the frequency of current applied to the brain.

                                                            1 5
                                          b.   Method of Conducting Study     This study will follow
                                               the frequency response curve and external irnpedarc-e
                                               study.  The same equipment and procedures are Lsed,
                                               The primary difference is in the tissues to be studieti.
                                               This study evaluates the impedance levels at var)ring
                                               frequencies in the brain tissue. Areas of the brain to
                                               be studied are:
                                               1)  Cerebral Cortex
                                               Z)  Thalmus
                                               3)  Hypothalmus
                2                               4)  Brain Stem
                                               5)  Cerebellum
                                          C.   Special Techniques - The study of external impedance
                                               required a maximum depth to the dura for recording
                                               electrodes.  In this study, the electrodes must be
                                               placed in specific locations of the brai2n.  Electrodes
                                               will be of minimum size to prevent excess damage to
                                               the brain tissue and will have a I rn. m.. uninsulated
                                               point for recording.  The insulation will be n@.)n-me.tallic
                                               to prevent error in results.  Metallic coating produces
                                0               extra capacitance values.  The principal investigator
                                               has placed acute and chronic electrodes in the brain
                                               of large animals.  Problems encountered will be solved
                                               by consultation with neuroanatorny and neurosurgery
                                               staif personnel.

                                                                16
                                          4.   Determination  of tissue voltage levels in the brain.
                                               a.   Theory:   The various types of brain cells and nerve
                                                    fibers have specific voltage potentials.  It is also
                                                    known that the voltage changes with the state of the
     2                                               cells, i. @-. resting, during depolarization or re-
                                                    polarization. 64. 65 It is reasonable to predict that
                                                    the induct,.on of additional voltage of electrical
                                                    currents into the brain will interfer with the normal
                                                  2  voltage potentials of Lie cells. thus affecting their
                                                    usual function.
                                               b.  Method to Complete Study.
                                                    1)  Equipment
                                                        a)   Electro-anesthesia generators.
                                                        b)   Oscilliscope with differential amplifi2er.
                                                        c)   Double recording electrodes with I m.m.
                                                             non-insulated tips I m. rn. apart.
                                                        d)   Electrodes controlled by-sterotaxic adjustment.
                                                    2)  Procedures
                                                        a)   Cadaver heads will2 be used to perfect
                                                             techniques arld then live calves.
                                                        b)   Electrodes will be worked through L-ephine
                                                             openings in the skull.
                                                        4c)  Readings wil'- be made in the major segments
                                                  0           of the brain F-t selected frequencies and
                                                             amplitudes of input current.

                                                             i7
                                                   3)  Brain Areas to be Studied
                                                       a)  Cerebral Cortex
                                                       b)  Thalmus
                                                       c)  Hypothalmus
                                                       d)  Brain Stern
                                           2            e)  Cerebellarn
                                         5.   Determination of the distribution of total electrical
                                              current in the cranium.
                                              a.    Object:  How much of the total current applied to
                                                    the head actually reaches the brain?  This is &n
                                                    in vi,#,ro study on cada,.rer heads.
                                              b.    Procedure:     Calf heads will be opened sufficie nily
                                                    for the brain to be aspirated.  Reco@rding electrodes
                                                    will be placed in the cerebral cavity and it will be
                                                    refilled with physiological saline.  Electrical currents
      2                                              will be applied to the head in the normal manner for
                                                    anesthesia and the current amplitude in the homolog-is
                                                    solution will be calculated from the osciuiscope
                                                    readings.  This value substracted fro--n the generator
                                                    output should gi9ve the amount of current dissipated
                                                    in the skinmuscle and bone of the head. 53
                                           6.   Determination of the convolution of dual electrical
                                                currents in the brain.

                                             a.    Theory:   The obseri@-ed responses of experimental
                                                   animals under the influence of dual electrical
                                                   currents indicate that ae effect on the central
                                                   nervous system is not the same as single wave
                                                   induced curr2ents. The responses a-re  of  a  sleep-
                                                   like nature rather than anesthesia if the combination
                                                   is summated in the generator, but indicates deeper
                                                   anesthesia if the summation is in the  head.  Since
                                                   surnmation of two currents in a system does not
                                        2           necessarily follow a nume-rically adding effect, it
                                                   is logical to believe that the currents applied to the
                                                   head frorn two sources are convoluting  (passing  one
                                                   another) in such form that the phase angles determinl-
                                                   if they are adding or canceuing in a particu2lar
                                                   segment of the brain.  Therefore, the determination
                                                   of this theory would indicate the possibility of
                                                   focusing current to specific locations of the brain.
                                              b.   Animals -
                                                   I   in vitro studies in cadaver calf heads,
                                    4               2)  in vivo studies in calves.
                                              C.   instrumentation
                                                   1)  Current Generator!;.
                                                   2)  Oscilliscope.
                                                   3)  Recording electrodes and sterotaxic equipment.

                                                                               AM6
                                             d.    Procedure
                                                   I   Electrodes would be surgically placed in
                                                       select locations in the cerebral cortex.
                                                       thaimus, hypothal.-nus, brain stem, and
                          2                             cerebellum.
                                                   2)  External currents for anesthesia would be
                                                       applied through external electrodes.
                                                   3)  Reading will be made on the oscilliscope.
                                                   4)  Using known input and observed output, the
                                                       convo2lution of current in the system (brain)
                                                       will be mathematically determined.
                                         7.   Determination of the role of the cerebral spinal fluid'
                                              as a conductor of electrical currents.
                                              a.   Since the impedance of CSF is so little compared
                                                   to the tissue of the2 head, there is evidence that
                                                   this may be the medium through which much of
                                                   the current flows.
                                              b    An in vitro study is proposed in which the hea-d and
                                                   neck of calves would be used as the container for
                                                   the fluids.  Currents will be applied to the head 8in
                                                   the normal fashion for electro-anesthesia.  Record-
                                                   ing electrodes will be placed in the brain and
                                                   connected to an oscilliscope.  After recordings

                                                       20
                                            of the voltage and current to the brain, the CSF
                                            will be replaced by electrolyte solutions'anci  HZO.
                                            The conductance through each  of  these  media  will
                                            be determined for correlation.  Thus the role of
                                        2    conductance through the CSF can be made.
                                  S.   Determination of the effects of indi-iced brain lesions on
                                       the capability to pfoduce electro-anesthesia.
                                       a.   To provide additional evidence that  specific  areas
                                            in the brain are involved with the mechanism of
                                            electro2-anesthesia, lesions vrill be produced in
                                            live animals in select areas of the  thalmus,  hypo-
                                            thalmus, and cerebral cortex and thci-r  effects  on
                                            the capability to produce electro-anesthesia
                                            determined.
                                       b.   Lesions will be sur2gically  produced  and  consulta-
                                            tion with the staff neurosurgecns at       1'will be
                                            made in perfecting  techniques.  Current  freq%2ency
                                            and amperage  requirements  will  be  compared  with
                                            those of normal brains.
                                       C.   The bradykinin test will be made to determ6ine depth
                                            of anesthesia.
                                  9.   Determination of the methods to focus current to specific
                                       locations in the brain.

                                                            21
                                            a.  Although  this study is listed last it is one of the
                                                most important studies.  However, the preceeding
                                                studies must be made to rnake it possible.
                                           b.   Theory,    It is desirable to only have the current
        2                                        in the brai n where stirnulation to specific sites
                                                will produce anesthesia, thus reducing the unwanted
                                                side effects.  The question to be answered is, "Can
                                                this be controlled by appiying currents at selected
                                                phase angles from speci-f-3Lc locations2 on the skuu
                                                to allow cancellation of current in aJI areas of the
                                                brain except those that need to be affected?
                                           C.   In this study, the multiple inducing electrodes wbuld
                                                be placed in specific loc&tions enabling the phase
                                                &ngle to be controlled, 2giving the proper level of
                                                current in various areas of the brain.  In the
                                                initial studies, the electrodes would be placed
                                                through the bone of the skull by surgical technique,
                                                thus eliminating the deflection of current by the
                                                bone.  After determination 2of the proper effect by
                                                this technique, attempts to produce tb-e same effect
                                                with electrodes outside the skull would be made.
                                                Thus determination can be made by recording from
                                                the specific locations of the bra,'In. the amount of
                                                current present.
            3              40

                                                                22
                                   C.     Specific Studies (Biological)
                                          1.  Determinati-on of the level of anesthesia.
                                              a.   The bradykinin test as -described by Lim, et, al 45- 52
                                                   Will be used as an index to depth of anesthesia.
                               2                    Either intra-arterial or intra-peritoneal  injection
                                                   of bradykininevokes a response if pain is perceived.
                                                   There is no tissue damage  by  bradykinin,  &nd  the
                                                   pa.in responses can be recorded in  terms  of  blood
                                                   pressure elevation.  The test can be re2peated
                                                   frequently.  Pain is perceived 15  seconds after
                                                   injection and lasts 30-40 seconds.
                                              b,   By using this test at each of the frequency and
                                                   arnplitude levels for the four types of current to
                                                   be studied, the depth of anesthesia and at what
                                                   current levels it occur3 can be determined.
                                              c.   By correlating response 6@O bradykinin with the
                                                   other physiological changes, an outline of the -
                                                   signs of various levels of anesthesia can  be  drawn
                                                   4up for electro-anesthesia.
                                              d.   Recordit@gs of responses will be made with a
                                                   physiological recorder  with  blood  pressure,  ECO,
                                                   and  impedance  pneumograph  transducers  and   pre-
                                                   amplifiers.  Blood pressure rm asurements wiU

                                                              2 3
                                                  be made by direct cannulation of the external
                                                  maxillary artery.
                                        2.   Determination of the effect of electro-anesthesia on
                                             blood gases and blood pH.
                                             a.   Since proper oxygen suppl2y to the bra-in ceus must
                                                  be maintained to prevent cell damage, the effects
                                                  of the various types of current on these  parameters
                                                  must be made.
                                             b.   Mgh amputude current5  at  low  frequencies  produce
                                                  definite respiratory 2distress.  It is, therefore,
                                                  important to 'know at wl-%at levels there is sufficie-it
                                                  disturbance'of the blood gases and pH to be hazardous.
                                             C.   Determination before, during, and  after  &nesthesia
                                                  will be done for all four types of current at 100 cycles
  2                                                per second and 5 milliamperage intervals.  The range
                                                  will extend from no detectable respiratory  distress
                                                  to obvious disturbance,
                                             d.   Arterial sarnples will be collected through an im-
                                                  planted carotid catheter and results dete4rmined
                                                  immediately after sampling.  Samples will be
                                                  collected at 15 minute intervals and idontinue until
                                                  the response is stable.

                         Ask
                                                                                  0
                                                               24  -
                                                   The instrument  to be used is the blood gas and
                                                   pH equipment produced by tnstz-urnentation Labs
                                                   of 15oston, Massachusetts.
                 2                         3.  Determination of the effect of electro-anesthesia on  the
                                              circulatory system, including blood glucose levels.
                                              a.   Cardiac arrest can be produced by clectro-anesthesi;x.
                                                   It is usually not fatal if the current is reduced
                                                   promptly, allowing the hea2rt to rt:sume function.
                                                   Cardiac arrest is not produced if higher frequencies
                                                   of current are used. Therefore, it is  important  to
                                                   know the range of currents which will produce cardiac
                                                   difficulties.
                                              b.   Three circulatory parar2neters that are knovm  to  be
                                                   affected by clectro-anesthesia will be studied.
                                                   1)  Blood Press@Lre.
                                                   2)  ECG for heart rate and 6Aytbmids.
                                                   3)  Blood Glucose.
                                              C.   All four types of current to be s2tudied at the frequency
                                                   and amplitudes ranges previously indicated.
                                              d.   Equipment
                                                   1)  Physiological recording  equipment  with  trans-
                                                       ducers and pream-.Dlifiers for blood pressure
                                                       and ECC.

                                                   2)   Bausch and Lornb Spectrometer for blood
                                                        glucose determination will be used.
                     ANTICIPATED PROGRESS
                          in vitro studies can start two weeks after funding.  It is anticipated that the
                     first four electrical studies for the four types of current and the biological
                     .studies for tw2o of the four types of current could be completed the first year.
                     PERSONNEL
                          IV.                                                              To be named.
                                  Will spend rninimum of 50'lo time on project.
                          V.      Aniynal Assistant - FuU time.
                          VI.     Technician for lab analysis       Full time.
                          Vil.    Secretary - 501c of time.
                          VM.     Neurosurgery                           Assistance available
                                                                         in adv-isory capacity
                          IX.     Neurophysiology
                                                                        from these departments
                          X.      Neuroanatomy
                          Xi.     Radiology

                                           BUDGET FIRST YEAR
                   PERSONNE'- SALARIES
                   rnves tigator . . . . .Full time
                   Technicians (2)
                   1.    Assisting with animal procedures
                   2.    Laboratory analysis
                   Secretary       part time (50@o)
                   Engineering                    (systems electronics)
    2               Consulting (Electronics, Neurosurgery, Neuroanatomey,                                  9-7
                         Neurophysiology)
                   ANIMALS
                   25 calves @ $60 each                                         $
                   Board.*   $4. 00/da)r for 330 day9
                                                                                $
                     Plan to reuse each animal as muct,. as possiltble.  N,-,-.rb-er on hand at a
                     given time will be two thus reducing board.--
                   EQUIPMENT
                   I .   Tektrc-nix Model R293 DC pulse generator and
                         power supply.                                          $
                         Hewl4@tt-Packard Model 3380 B Sine wave generator
                         (can @e used in both sine wav0e analysis and external
                         summation analysis, one sine wave generator is
                         already available for use in dual wave convolution
                         studi4ps).

                                                     -2-7 -
                  3.    Genera-I '-@-adio Impedance Bridge for measuring
                        brain impedance levels, Model 1608-A
                  4.    Motor drive unit for exact rate of curr,ent appli-
                        cation in all cases
                  5.    Simpson Voltmeter Model 312
                  6.    Blood ga3 analysis equipment.  Inst2rumentation
                        Labs. NEcro-analysis system
                        Gasses for caliberation of above
                  7.    Bausch and Lomb Sepectrometer      Model 20 for
                        blood glucose determinations
                  8.    Oscilliscope for monitoring waveform, rise t'
                        distortion of waves, voltage levels and time    irn e,
                        intervals
                        The Tek2tronix Model 561A with needed components
                        lists for $1, 780. 00.  The Hewlett-Packard Model
                        141A with similar  components  is  $2,  075.  00.  There
                        is one advantage of the H-P model in that information
                        can be stored on  the  screen.  This  would  enable  one
                        to record frequency responses, rise time, voltage
                        levels, f@t2c. , on the screen at specific intervals  and
                        &at dire(: t comparisons.  Thus more accuracy can
                        be obtained.  The work can be done with either.
                        More accuracy is preferred but can be sacrificed      in
                        this case if needed for budget purposes.
                  9.    OscilliscQpe camera for permanent records      of
                        readings, (will work with either of the oscilliscope
       5                 models listed).
                  10.   Sterotoxic apparatus by Universal-
                        610101 "HI' stand with adjustable horizontal bar
                        6101OZ Horizontal rider
                        610103 Carrier housing

                                                  -28@-
                        610104 Micrometer carrier
                        613001 Micrometer
                        613510 Chuck, insulated
                        Base plate and head holder will be constructed
                        fit needs.  The equipment listed can be used in
                        either micro or macro-electrode applications.
                   11.  Electrodes, connecting cables and 2electrical probes
                        TOTAL EQUIPMENT
                   SURGERY CRARGES
                        These charges are f,)r surgical instruments, suture, operating room
                   charges.  Sinc,-- animals are to be reused the procedures will be made
                   using aseptic techniques.
                   50 days of surgery @ '.' Yday                             $
                   MISCEL2LANEOUS
                   Physiological recording instrument paper
                   Photography
                   Travel
                   Tubing, catheters, drugs, chemicals
                   Computor time in data analysis
                   Institutional Overhead:
                         401* of Salaries                                    $
                         Total First Year                                    $

                                                                                  Ask
                                                     -29-
                         Reductions in equipment cost the second year should offset any
                   increases in other items for a second year budget of $          Detailed
                   budgets for tirne periods after the initial year will be submitted at the
                   requested time.

                                                                       AGMIL
                                                  -30-
                    REFERENCES FOR ELECTRO-ANF-STMESIA
                    1.    LeDue, S.  1903. Llelectrisation cerebrale. Arch. Elect. Med. 11: 403-410.
                    2.    Fabian, L. W., S. D. Hardy, M. Don Turner, P. S. Moore.  1961.
         2                 ElectricalanesthesiaV. Surveyofclinicalprogresswithinustrativecas,-S.
                          Anesth. Analg. 40,653-661.
                    3.    Geddes, L. A., C. C. Turbes, M 'Hinds, W. E. Barrows.  1965. The
                          EEG during electronarcosis. Anesth. Analg. 44:305-312.
                    4.    Geddes, L. A. , H. E. Hoff, and C. Voss.  1964. Cardiovascular respiratox-y
                          studies during electronaxcosis in the dog. Cardiovasc. Research Center
                          Bul:Letin 3:38-47.       1
                    5.    Gowing, D., R. S. Underwood, F. P. Haugen.  1964. Electroca-rdiograpVjc
                          studies during electronarcosis. Anesthesiology Z5:668-671.
                    6.    Cowing,  D.   1964.   Electro2cardiographic studies during electro-anesthes5a.
                          .First Symp,  on Electroanesthesia.   (Physiol.  Dept. .  Colorado State
                          University,  Ft.  Collins,  Colorado).   pp 37-39.
                    7.    Hardy,  1.  D. ,  L.  W.  Fabian and M.  D.  Turner.   1961.   Electrical anesthesi.@
                          for major surgery.   ;.  Amer.  Med.  Ass2n.   175:599-600.
                    8.    Hardy,  J.  D.,  T. Carter,  and M.  D.  Turner.   1959.   Catechol &mine
                          metabolism.   Ann.  Surg.  150:666-683.
                    9.    Hardy,  J.  D.,  M.  D.  Turner,  and C.  D.  McNeil.   1961.   Electrical
                          anesthesia.   S.  Surg.  Res.   1.152-168.  .
                    10.   Herin,  R.  A.   1964.   Induction techniq2ue changes and electroencephaiogi;aphic
                          body temperature,  and pupillary light reflex studies in dogs anesthetized
                           'th electric current.   Amer.  S.  Vet.  Res.  Z5:739-746.
                          wt  .
                    11.   Klemm,  W.  R.   1964.   A square-wave elect:rical anesthesia current
                          gerlerator.   Ay,esthesiology 25:718-719.
        2            1.2.  K-lemm,  W.  R.  & R.  O'Leary.   L964.   Comparison of electrical pararhetexs
                          and the quality of electroanesthesia.   Anesthesiology 25:776-780,
                    13.   Knatson,  Robert C.   1954.   Experirnents in electronarcosis:  a prelirnina-,ry
                          study.   Anesthesiology 15:551-558.
                    14.   Knutson,  2Robert C.,  F.  Y.  Tichy,  and J.  M.  Reitman.   1956.   The use of
                          electrical current as an anesthetic agent.   Anesthesiology 17:815-825.
                    15.   Knutson,  R.  C.,  N.  R.  Magfors,  and J.  H.  Matthews.   1965.   Modification
                          of -epileptic adter-discharges by electroanesthesia currents.   Presented at
                          Znd Ann.  Symp.  on Ele3ctroanesthesia.   Univ.  of Tenn. ,  Kn-.)xville.
                          Ap-ril,  1965.

                                                            31
                      i  6,  Knutson, R. C.  1964.  The electroencephalograin in electroanesthesia.
                             Proc. Lst Symp. Electroanesthesia.  Et. Collins, Colorado.
                      17.    Price. J. H. and W. H. L. Dornette.  1963.  Clinical experience with
                             electroanesthesia.  Anesth. Analg. 42:487-495.
                      is.    Powers, M. F. and W. B. Wood.  1964.  Electrical anesthesia studie---,
                             di-.rerse effects.  Ane3th, Analg. 43-.385-392.
                      19.    Sances, A. , Jr. . and S. T. Larson.  1963.  Electrona-rcosis and evoked
                             brain potentials.  Science 141:733-735.
                      zo.    Sances, A. 2, Jr. . S. J. Larson and S. L. Tacobs.  1963.  Recording of
                             brain potentials during electronarcosii.  16th Ann, Conf. on Eng. ia
                             Med. and Biol.  Harry S. Scott, Baltimore.  p. 68-69 (266 pp).
                      21.    Sances, A. , Tr.  1964.  Effects of electrorarcosis on evoked,responees
                             in the brain,  A dis s ertation in partial2 fulfillment of the r equirerr* nts
                             for Ph.D. Bio-medical  Eng.  Center,  Northwestern  Univ.,  Evanston,  W.
                      Z2.    Sances, A. , Jr. , and S. J. Larson.  1964.  Sensory and motor function
                             during electroanesthesia.  Proc. 17th Ann. Conf. on Eng. in Biol. and
                             baed. in Cleveland. Ohio.  MacGregor an2d Werner, Washington, D.C.
                             127 pp.
                      23.    Sznces, A. , Jr. , and S. T. Larson. 1964.  Mathematical  representatic-n
                             of classical sensory pathway as a function of electro-marcosis.  Abstract
                             WGt.  Biophysical Soc, 8th Ann. Meeting.
                      24.    $ances, A. , Jr. , and S. J. Larson.  1965.  Neuro2physiological effects
                             of electroanesthesia.  Exp. Neurol.  13: <>.-t. 1965.
                      2 5.   $ances, A. , Jr., and S. J.  Larson.  1965.  Evoked  potentials  "  motor
                             response determin&tions in the presence of Anan'ev type currents.  Znd
                             Ann. Coni. on Electroanesthesia, Knoxville, Tenn.  April, 1965.
            2          26.    $ances, A., Jr. , and S. J. Larson.  1965.  Transient and steady state
                             response of soma-dendrite neuron model to step and  rectangular  current.
                             Abstract. Proc. 9th Ann. Meeting Biophysical Soc.
                      27.    $hort, Charles E.  1965.  The physiological effects of electroalnesthesia
                             @n domestic animals.  Presented at 72nd Ann. Symp. on Electroanesthesia,
                             Univ. of Tenn., Knoxville, Tenn.  April, 1965.
                      ZS.    S-iort, C. E., C. C. Turbes, and 3@. S. Snyder.  1964.  Large animal
                             electroanesthesia.  Proc. Ist Ann. Rocky Mt. Bioengineering Syrnp.
                             'LT. S. Air Force Academy, Colorado.  p 231-286.

                                                            -32
                        29.    Short, C. E.  1964.  The application of electroanesthesia on large
                               animals: a report of 100 administrations.  S. Amer. Vet. Med.
                               Assoc. 145;1104-1106.
                        30.    Short, C. E.  1964.  Experiences in the applications of electroanestheria
                          2     to equidae.  Agricultural Research Lab.  UT-AEC, Oak Ridge, Tenn.
                               Proc. 10th Ann. Conv. Amer. Assoc. Equine Fractit.  Denver, Colo.
                               December 1964.  p 158-166.
                        3i,    Short, C. E.  1965.  Clinical effects of anesthesia produced by
                               alternating electrical current.  Anesth. d-nalg. 44:517-SZI.
                2        32.    Srnith, Robert H. and Stuart C. Cullen.  1962.  Electrorkarcosis - A
                               progress report.  Amer. J. Med. Electronics S:308-313.
                        33.    Smith, Robert H. and Stuart C. Cullen.  1962.  Electronarcosis by
                               -combination of direct and alternating current. 3.  Electrodes  and
                               electrode holders.  Anesthesiology 23:68Z-2686.
                        34.    Smith, Robert H. , Robert R. Hylton, and Stuart C. Cullen.  1965.
                               Electronarcosis by a combi'nation of direct and alternating current.'
                               Arner. J. Med. Electr.  Jan. -March, 1965.  p 38-41.
                        35.    -Smith, Robert H., Robert R. Hylton, Sohn R. McCabe, and Stuart C.
                               Cullen.  L965.  Electr2ical anesthesia produced by a combination of
                               direct and alternating current: technical studies in the Macaque
                               monkey.  Anesthes. Analg. 44:275-279.
                        36.    Smith, Robert H., Richard K. Richards, Ward R. Richter, Robert
                               R. Hylton, John R.  McCabe,  Stuart  C.  Cullen.  1965.  Electrical
                               anesthesia produced by combining di2rect and  alternating  currents:
                               electronrnicroscopy of the dog  brain.  Anesthesiology  Z6:607-614.
                        37.    Turbes, C. C. and L. A. Geddes.  1964,  Central nervous system
                               activity associated %vith electronarcosis.  First Sy-rnp. Electroanesth.
                               Physiol. Dept., Colo. State Univ. . Ft. Collins, Colo.  p 52-67.
      2                  38.    Turbes, C. C. and L. A. Geddes.  1965.  Studies on cerebral
                               cortical and subcortical activity during electroanesthesia.  In Proc.
                               2nd  Ann.  Rocky  Mt.  Bioengin.  Symp.,  USAF  Academy,  Colorado.
                               p 111-113.
                        39.    Turbes, Calvin C.  L965.  Electrode placements and the neurophys-
                              9 iology involved. Presented at the Second Ai-in. Syrnp. on  Electro-
                               ELnesthesia.  Univ. of Tenn., Knoxville.  April, 1965.

                                                           33 -
                        40.    Van Harreveld, A. , M. S. Plesset, and C. A. Wiersrna.  1942.
                               Relation between the physical properties of electric-currents and
                               their electronarcotic action.  Amer. J. Physiol.  137:39-46.
                        41.    Van Harreveld, A. , D. B. Tyler,  and  C.  A.  Wiersma.  1943.2
                               Brain metabolism during  clectronarcosis.  Amer.  S.  Physiol.
                               139:171-177.
                        42.    Van Harreveld, A.  1947.  On the mecha-aisrn and localization of
                               the symptoms of electroshock and electronarcosis.  S. Neuropath.
                               Exp. Neurol.  6:177-184.
                        43.    Van Harreveld, A. and W. B. Dandiliker.  1945.  Blood pressure
                               changes during electronarcosis. Proc.  Soc.  Exp.  Biol.  Med.
                               60:391-394.
                        44.    Wood, W. B., M. F. Powers. W. H. L. Dornette, and S. Price.
                               1964.  The cardiovascular effects of cra-nially impressed electric
                               ,currents of anesthetic intensity. Anesth. Analg7.  43-313-323.

                                                            -,36-
                                                   RELATED REFERENCES
                       BRADYKININ
                       .45.    C. Braun, F. Guzman, E. W. Horton, R. K. S. Lim and G. D.
                               Porter.  Visceral Recepters Pain, Bradyk:.nin, and Analgesic
                               Agents.  Proceedings of the Physiological Soc:-ety 4-5 Nov. 1960.
                               Journal of Physiology, 155, 13-14p.
                       46,     G@ D. Dickerson, R. S. Engle, F. Guzman, D. W. Rodgers, and
                               R@ K. S. Lim.  The Intraperitoneal Bradykinin - Evoked Pain Test
                               for Analgesia.  Life Science, 4, pp 2063-ZO69. 1965.  Pergamori
                               Press, Ltd.
                       47@.    Frank Guzma2n, C. Braun, and Robert K. S. Lirn.  Visceral Pain
                               and the Pseudaffective Responses to tntra-arterial Injection of
                               Bradykinin and other Algesic Agents.  Arch. int Pharmacodyn,
                               t962, CXXXVI, pp 3=4.
                       48.     F. Guzman, C. Braun, R. K. S. Lim, G. D.. Porter and D. W.
                               Rodgers.  Narcotic and Non-narcotic Analgesia 2which Block Visceral
                               Pain Evoked by rntra-Arteria-1 injection of Bradykinin and other
                               Algesic Agents.  Arch. int. Pharmacody-n, 1964, 149, pp 3-4.
                       491.    Robert K. S. Lirn.  Visceral Receptors and Visceral Pain.  Annals
                               of the New York Academy of Sciences, 86, Article 1, pp 73-89.
                               March 320, 1960.
                       50.     R. K. S. Lim, F. Cruzrnan, D. W. Rodgers, K. Coto, C. Braun, 0.
                               D. Dickerson and R. 1. Engle.  Site of Action of Narcotic and Non-
                               narcotic Analgesics Determined by Blocking Bradykinin Evoked
                               Visceral Pain,  Arch. int. Pharmacodyn. 1964, 1SZ, pp I-Z.
                       5 I.    Robert K. S. Lim, Cha Nao Lin, Frank Gazman, and Christian Braun.
                               Visceral Receptors Concerned in Visceral Pain and the ?seudo-
                               affective Response to tntra-arterial Inject4on of Bradykinin and other
                               Algesic Agents.  Journal of Comparative Anatomy, 118, p. 3, Tune, '.962.
                       52.     I:L. K. S. Lim, F. Guzma9n, and D. W. Rodgers.  Note on the Muscle
                               R.eceptors Concerned with Pain.  Symposium on Muscle Receptors,
                               Ed, by Barker, Davi   d.  University of Hong Kong.  Golden Jubilee
                               Congress, September 11-16, 1961.

                                 ELECTRECAL DISSECTION
                                 53,           L, A. Geddes. Unpublished data from 3rd Symposium on Electro-
                                               anesthesia.   St.  Louis University School of Medicine.   May,  1966.
                                 IMPEDANCE CHANGES
                                 54.           W.  R.  Adey, R.  T.  Kado,  1.  Didio,  and W.  J.  2Schindler.   "Impedance
                                               Changes in Cerebral Tissue Accompanying a Learned Discriminative
                                               Performance in the Cat. 11  Experimental Neurology,  7, pp Z59-281.
                                               ('- 9 6 3).
                                 Ss..          W,  R.  Adey,  R.  T.  Kado,  and D. 0.  Walter.   "Impedance Characterisf2xcs
                                               of Cortical and Sijb-cortical Structures:  ]Evoluation of Regional
                                               Specificity in Hypercapnea and Hypothermia!!  Experimental Neurology,
                                               11,  pp 190-216.  (1965).
                                  56.          Paul W.  Nicholson.   "Specific Impedance of Cerebral White                             
Matter".2
                                               Experimental Neurology,  13,  pp 386-401 11965).
                                  57.          Wilfrid RaU.   "Membrane Potential Transients and Membrane Timq
                                               Constant of Matoneurons".   ExperL-iiental Neurology,  2,  pp 503-537
                                               (1960).
                                  58.          James B.  Ranck,  Jr.  and Spencer L.  BeMent.   "The Specific Impedanr-e
                                               of the Dorsal Columns of Cat:  An Anisotropic ',%4edium ".   Experimental
                                               Neurology,  It.  pp 451-463 (1965).
                                   59.         James B.  Ranck,  Jr.   "Specific Impedance of Rabbit Cerebral Cortex".
                                      2         Experimental Neurology,  7, pp 14-4-152 (1963).
                                   60.         James B.  Ranck,  Jr.   Analysis of Specific Impedance of Rabbit Cerebral
                                               Cortex.   Experimental Neurology,  7, pp 153-174 (1963).
                                   61.         tchiji Tasaki.   Conduction of Nerve Impulse.   Handbook of Physiology
                                     2          or Neurophysiology,  I,  pp 75-121.
                                   62.         A.  van Harreveld and Sidney Ochs.   "Cerebral Ernpedance Changes
                                               After Circulatory Arrest".   American                    IJournal Physiology,  187:180-19a,
                                               1956.
                                    63.        Robert L.  Willenkin.   Anesthetic Level and 8Electrical Resistance of
                                               the Brain Stem.   Anesthesiology,  27-2,  1966,  p.  231.

                      64.    Barry Wyke. General Anesthesia, lp pp 157-300.  Washington
                             Butterworths, 1965.
                      65.    Sidney Ochs. Elements of Neurophysiology.  John Wiley & Sons.
                             tnc. , New York, 196 5.

