        irrANDAFto ropm No. 64
                                                                                           _VP
        Office Memorandum o UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
        TO                                                        DATE:  16 November 1951
        Vi@i
        FROM
        SUBJECT: "Side Tone Delay"
                          Since                    Chief of the                   was in-
                 strumental in setting up t7he demqnstra-tion for the "side tone delay"
                 instrument and since he has been in continuous consultation with the
                 writer and his associates in this matter, the writer took the liberty
                 of showing             the attached memorandum and related pauers.
                      2.             informed the writer that he agrees with the general
                 thought in the attached memorandum concerning the instrument.

                                                                                             qz
        ST ANOAP!@N FORM NO. 64
         Office Memorandum                             UNITED'STATES  GOVERNMENT
        TO                                                                DATE:  16   November   1951
        Vi.Z
        FROM
        SUBJ9,CT:   "Side Tone Delay"
                         1.  Reference is made to the attached memorand2um from
                               OSI, and other related papers.
                         2.  For a matter    of  record  the  "side  tone  delay"  is  an   instniment
                    or  series  of  instruments,  which  is  designed  to  confuse  and  confound  an
                    individual under interrogation.  The principle of the device simpiy stated
                    is that  an  individual's  speech  is  confused  when  sound  uttered  by2  the  in-
                    di.7.ridual is carried to the  individual's  ears  a  fraction  of  a  second  or
                    longer  after  he  has  uttered  the  sound.  This  confusion,  it  is   believed,
                    will cause an individual  who  i-s  lying  or  evadin-  an  answer  to  have  the
                    feeling that  his  confused  speech  is  due  to  guilt.  lience  forcing  him  to
                    admit guilt or  becoming  2so  confused  as  to  make  obvious  the  fact  that  he
                    is evasive or lying.
                         3.'  The  instrument  proper,  which  is  being  used  for  demonstration   at
                    the present time, con'sists  of  a  tape  recording  iinit  and  a  receivin-  unit
                    which, in a rough sense, are portable.         However,  the   laboratory   instru-
                    ments have  not  yet  been  perfected  and.  are  cumb2ersomp.  and  non-portable.
                         4. Concerning I ?,, 50 interests in this ,,.allter, -'@l, Ls belie-,,red  that
                    we would  have  two  poE!,3ible  interests.  The  first  would  be  in  connection
                    vyith the ',:Iolygrarh Section of I @c SO  and  the  second  in  connection  with
                    the "Artichoke" work.
                      2        In so far as   the Polygraph Section is concern,-@d, it is felt that
                    if the instrument co,-ild be perfected, it mipht po,-@,sil-ly  be  of  use  on  in-
                    dividual cases wherg the noly-raph clearly indicated deception, 13'ing, or
                    evasion,  and  where  extremely  important  and  qliestionable  matters  are   in-
                    volved.  The  writer  doubts 2 that  the  instrunent  could  be   used   effectively
                    on the normal  or  routine  polygraph  case  and  feels  that  it  would  have  to
                    be reserved for  special  work  or  cases  that  are  not  capable  of  being  com-
                    plet-,ly resolved by the polygraph t,echniqite.  lllo,-iever, it is believed
                    that  if  the  instrument  could  be  technically  perfecte(l,  it 2 would  probably
                    have value to the 10olygraph Section.
                              Th--, use of the instruraent by "Artichok,,@"  der)ends  a  Freat  deal
                    upon its technical developr,.ient.  "Artichoke" contp-riplates a far more
                    subtle technique for obtaining positive information and, in addition,
                    contemplates obt0aining information from unwilling individuals or in-
                    dividuals who reflise to co-operate in any way.  At the present stage,
                    it would  appear  that  the  instrument  could  only  be  used  on  a  "volunteer
                    basis".

                        7.  Since the instrument is to be developed as an Agency project
                  and not as an I & SO specific function,  it  is  the  opinion  of  the  writer
                  and his associates that the project is probably worthwhile and should
                  be supported. There are, however,  from  our  point  of  view,  a  number  of
                  items which should be considered in the development of the proj2ect.
                  These are set forth immediately following:
                             1. If the  instrument  is  perfected  and  has  been  demonstrated
                        to be effTctive,,a..@ortable instrument, if it  could  be  dev--lo-oed,
                        would be of great advantage.  This would be valuable for Agency
                        personnel overseas or for  special  work  requiring  teams  to  go-into
                        th2e field.
                             2.  If at all possible electronically, it would be of great
                        advantage if, by the use of a directional microphone and directional
                        loud speakers, the earphones  could  be  eliminated  and  no  attachments
                        required for placing on the subject.
                             3. Experiments should be run  as  to  whether  or  not  the  device
                        coild be linked  dir2ectly  into  a  polygraph.  However,  these  experi-
                        nients should be'very cautiously worked out so  as  not  to  give  arti-
                        ficial or overstrong responses  due  to  the  confusion  resulting  from
                        the "side tone delay" .
                                 If tests are to be run by              and  his  Associates  on
                        the device, they should  not  be  confined  2to  criminal  investigations
                        alone nor should they be confined to purely  personnel  matto--rs.  The
                        instril-nent should he checked against all types of qli6stions,  par-
                        ticularly identity questions and questions involving a person's
                        loyalty, etc., etc.
                             5. Spec@-fic efforts should be made to  see  that  the  instru2ment
                         does not oroduce indications of @-ruilt in individuals who  are  inno-
                        cent,, but who become confused by the operation of the machine.
                             6.  Although the project was brought to our attpntion and fully
                        co-ordinated with the ;@'@                            , it is felt  that
                        this Agency, if it is paying for 2the develor)ment  of  the  instrument,
                        should have at all times, access to  the  testing  and  authority  to
                        consult with and advise                  @-ind his 4ssociates.  Further-
                        more, if experimentation shoi-is that the instrument  has  a  decided
                        advo.ntage and is test,inF,, siiccess.Ci.illy, this AE,,ency, and pirticu-
                        larly I &- 50, should be authorized to send men  to  the  project  to
                        be trained in the use of the instrument as soon as possible.
                                                   -2-

                           7. '@@hile the instrument is being, te3ied, tests should be  con-
                     ducted in foreign lanauages if possible and tests should also be run
                                           C)
                     involving the use of an interpretator.  This may be necessary in
                     some future work of this Agency.
                     8.  The writer and his as7ociates an2d                     Chief of the
                Polygraph Section, have discussed this matter at some length.  All are
                agreed that the d--vice,may have merit and, if  effectively  developed,  may
                be a definite aid to advanced interrogation.  It.s use as a routine in-
                strument is doubted.   Since            and his Associater, appear to have
                started work in this field, it is believed thev are  best  suited 2 to'c-arry
                on this work although, undoubtedly,  ' will @irectly profit from the
                development of the instrument in his commercial  pol@,graph  work.
                     9.  The writer is unable to state whether or not .,@.-15,000 is excessive
                for-this type of a project but on the basis of  the  budget  submitted,  the
                Costs do not appea.- too heavy.
           4                                                             "Now"
                                                                                 -.!7- -7@@

