  ST &Nt;Aro rvrm tio r,4
              Mei7zorai7dl,1711                UNITED S'FATL-             -oVEltNMENT
  TO                                                              DATE: 27 iiii@, I/Q51
     ,I,t,cntion:
                1-@trwl;pc"@clrri@tv 0 icer
  FROM       Der) i        tv Off i(
  SL7BJECT.:                                                    r
             I'licre is a'+dche                 d 26 J ne 1051 co-nccrniiif,, a demonstration
                                 a                     u
  or P,-Iiiinrei-i@ by the                            of an electronic  unit  kno-vm  as  the
                      1,                       on2a--Stretcl-ieroil  This rcl)ort i
  it 'Dono-Graph," the                                                           s   referred
   as being of possible interest in connection 7ritla research under Project Dlitebird.
  At this tiitic it does not a@npear that these inotrumen'u3 i-ioiild be of valiie  to  il@os
   ar, they are cf a @Lir,)-il5r t(--clini@--al nature anO V,,ibir use (tor-s not -Lr,,rcar to ',)c acla,)t,-
   able t5 field opera-tioii3.  In adcli.',-
                                       . ion the ov(..rall resillto of tiii.s technique do
   not seem to ici(I in-,-tliiii- to our field -Lcams 5but tlici-c is a possibility CSI may find
   that si-ic,i instrurents are -vior@liy of further develo,,)mcn@.
                             1\11"<LN I-'ROM

                                                *Wow
                                                                             t4
                                                                      26  June 19 51
                 TO
                 FRO@L
                 SuDi
                            In compliince ,,Tith your t@,-lephon@!            of  25   Jane,
                 today  I  attended  a  d2emonstration  of  several   units   of   electronic
                 sn--ch anal. z  i n e ui)m!!nt.  This detqonstrati             held in
                                                            es or
                                                            e3e
                            The eq,iipment on display was contained       in   three   metal
                 cases. '@inc,@  this  displ2ay  was  somewhat  a  oi-lot  model  and  cpiite
                 bulk@r,. it  could  in  no  sense  be  conz3idered  for  extensivt  portable
                 use.  Upon  inquiry  I  was  advised   that   considerable   reductions   in
                 weik,ht and size could be made on future models.
                                            factory rel)resr!ntative and elm2(,-tronic
                 enciiiter gave a v@-ry  thorough  and  detailed  exl)linq.tion  and   actual
                 demonstration of the 1"7ono-C,raDh      the ll'onalptor"    and tli!!! "'---ona-
                 14.
                 ,)Ur--tcher".  Following  is  briefly  what  each  device  will  accoml)lish
               2  with comments on our possible usag,,!.
                 TIIE SOliA-0@TRi-"TCIIER A  device  for  the  study  of  speech  character-
                 istics.  Py  reducina  the  speed  to  one   half,   speech   imperfections
                 or  other  unii3iial  defccts  can  be  detected.  Students  would  then  be
                 able to learn actual language pronunciations2 more qiickly.
                 CO@l'.IEIiT It was brouFIit out in thf- di,.5cussion tliit an operator
                 well  trained  might  dete(--t  pecilliar  speech   characteristics   which
                 could reveal the area where a subject learned to st)eak a carticular
                 langtiage.  I.E@. A foi-eign-born  subject  sl)eal<j.ng  wiiit  appeared  to
                 be perfect  English,  woilld  retniti  irregula.riti!!s  wh;-ch  could  not
                 be heard at normal  speed.  It  is  believed  thit  much  re7:,t-.lrch  and
                 ti-aining  would  be  n@-cessary  before  such  a  mcthod  could  be   used
                 with any degrei of accurac
                                              2.y
                                @,lhen words are  spoken iti@,o a Tnicrqpliorl!!,      ')on-
                 actor transforms this speech     into  visiblc  patterns  on   an   oscillo-
                 scope wiiich are visible-only    as they are being sr-)okeri.  This
                 visible  speech  systnm  ig   said to  be  useful-  in   phonetic   studies,
       6          speech training and education of the deaf.

                       Wlii'l,-! certain traini.nf, in sl,,,@,!ch miglit be benefici,.il,
             again it is b'eliev@-,d tiiat no individiial., less than a phonetician
             could make this piece of equipment applicable to our needs.
             T,'rE SOIIA-GiqAFIH Ths spoken word is rncorded on a carbon  I'@acked
             recording paper via the heated st-,rlus method.  This device
             records complex audio frequency waves and provides t@,To recorded
             analyses of the-se waves. These records  aro--  useful  in  plionetic
             5tudies, speech ecll)cation of the d,-!af, sideech iitil)edi-ment
             correction and foreign language inst2ruction.  (7am,71e attached).
             COF-E,ENT As in the case  of  two  previously  described  devices  it
             is believed that some  consideration  should  be  giren  is  to  whether
             this eqiiiqment might be benificia.lly used.  It is an established
             fact that several men have  trained  themselves  in  some  way  so  that
             wh.-3n any person speaks a fe8w words to this indivi(iual, he cin
             accurately determine whmre a person was born or snent much of
             their childhood in a high percentaf,,t of persons  test!,-d.  F'or  this
             reason the extent of  training  needed  for  an  operator  should  be
             fully exploited before consid,@,-ration is  given  regarding  the  usage
             of this equipment in the future.

