                                                                   7 September 1971
                    IlEtIO7',ANDIR@l FOR TIIE RECORD
                    SUBJI-:CT:  Trip Report
                              Personnel Incapacitation Contract Status
                         1. This contract was scheduled to terminate  31  October  1971.
                    However, as of 31 July only 25% of the funds had be2en expended as
                    compared with a projected 75% expenditure. The  Project  Officer  had
                    been made aware of this situation as it was a consequence of assigned
                    personnel being engaged in the completion of other  high  priority  ,
                    Aoency tasks.  In as mucli as the Division had no funds for extending
                    the project or initiating follow-on tasks, it did not seem appropriate
                    to insist that2 the contractor maintain his planned  schedule.  A  no-
                    cost extcnsion until 30 April 1972 has been requested  and  approved.
                         2., The essential ptirpose of the visit was to structure definitive
                    plans for continuation of the project.  The  principal  investigator
                    and his collegues had outlined several alternative approaches for
                    discussion with the Proj2ect Officer. These included,  but  were  not
                    limited to:
                             a.  Extensive library search along with consultant assistance
                         to provide an extensive annotated bibliography in the  area  of
                         personnel incapacitation.
                             b. Establishment of Consultant Workshops and  Ad  Hoc  Com-
                         mittees to evaluate present and hopefully generate new concepts
                     2    of personnel incapacitation.
                             c.  on the basis of available information, to structure
                         psychological and physiological continua of incapacitation
                         from alertness to death.  The concept is similar to that of
                         the anesthesiologist's "planes of consciousness."
                                                                  'ly of  incapacitation
                             d.  A detail3ed study of a single fani,
                         methods, i.e., Impact, Cliemical, Sensory Overload, etc.

                      SUBJECT:  Trip Report
                                Personnel Incapacitation Contract StiLus
                           3.  on the basis of extended discussions, mutual a"reament was
                      reached on the followinc, plan of iction; minimum  effort  (10%)  %-Jill
                      be devoted to continuin- aquisition  and  review  of  new  documents.
                 2     The contractor will continue to  remain.alart  to  new  concepts  of
                      personnel incapacitation. To  date  the  only  new  possibilities  not
                      previously considered by others in this area are:
                               a.  Use of                 /as a tasteless, odorless,
                           incapaci@atiii:@_gas not requiring an antidote  or  leaving  body
                           traces.           L-Personne2l are co-,ipletely familiar with  the
                           use of--                      Idata from  submarine  and  space
                           habitability studies,  industrial  medicine  and  other  sources.
                           liowever,   lhas not been considered in terms of our personnel
                           incapacitation  requirements.  Recognizin-  the  necessity   for
                           closed space application,  the  scenarios  for  whi2ch  controlled
                           concentrations of -- lwould  be  applicable  are  quite  limited.
                               b.  The second "new" concept     in terms  of  utilization  for
                           temporary personnel incapacitation, is the use of          as  a
                           vehicle for  transmission  of  incapacitatin-  chemical  agents
                                                                       0
                           thro2ugh the skin.  The contractor is completely.ai-7are of previotis
                           unclassified research in this area.. In fact,             lis
                           doing other work for the Aaency in the area of toxicoloa
                                                       c@                              Y
                           for which I do not have a-"need to knoii."  It is quite possible
                           that certain of th2e contractor personnel are aware of previous
                           classified res@arch in the area.
                           ass3.gned to this project, has worked extensively iiith.
                           and should have the back-round to rapidly determine it's
                           applicability for our requirements.
                           4. It was mutually agreed  that  if  a  first  appraisal  of  these
                      two concepts indicates low probabil2itv  of  success,  work  would  be
                      discontinued regarding                  perhaps, in the course of con-
                      tinuing effort under this contract  they  will  generate  other  pos-
                      sibilities. Parenthetically, one  of  the  reasons  for  letting  the
                      initial contract with the                    -. iwas the  hope  that  an
                      o!rganization with a medical  orientation,  loo2king.at  the  problem
                      from the man to the aeent rather than  from  the  agent  or  hardware
                                            CD
                      to the man,, could generate concepts not previously considered.
                      However, as indicated in the previous trip report
                      dated 18 ilay 1971) "both they and the Pi:oject  officer  are  aware
                      that a gamble on new ideas is a Iii-h risk investment.''
                                                       -2-

                  SUBJECT:  Trip Rcport
                            Personnel Incapacitation Contract Stittis
                       5. The third and perhaps most si-nificant  area  of  effort,
                  assuriiin(, the contractor does not gcnerate a riajor brealcthrou-Ii with
                  a new concept, is a systems analysis of potential incapacitation
                  methods. The contra2ctor will conduct a systems  analysis  of  energy
                  sources, i.e.,, impact, liaht, sound, electric current,  chemical
                  and others in terms of                           C>
                                         'physical aspects of the aoent, delivery
                  system, physiolo-ical and medical considerations,  applications  and
                  limitations, and reconmcndations. Emphasis will  be  placed  upon
          2        the physiological and medical aspects as opposed to delivery systems
                  and operational factors.  A plan for a systems analysis of vis ual
                  incapacitation was generated by this office and for which
                      have submitted a written requirement to implement.  (Attachment
                  I).  The contractor will utilize this document as a guideline for
                  his systems analysis effort.
                       6. In spite of extens2ive thouoht and  experimentation  by  com-
                  petent authorities, none have defined an efficient non-lethal
                                                                                 fwill
                  weapon system.  Perhaps, in the course of their work
                  do so. Ho@iever, if this does not materialize they  should  still
                  meet the essential requirements of their contract, which  as  stated
                  in the2 Bluebook, "this project will or-anize available data in a
                                                         c@
                  matrix fashion so that at any given time one could determine the
                  specific research parameters necessary to fill in the'gaps to
                  provide required systems . . . to provide a data bank of information
                  concerning the physiological effect of energy sources as  these  may
                  be ap9propriate to the development of long range systems."  The
                  philosophy is identical to that expressed in Attachment I.  I
                  feel the contractor will satisfactorily meet the  contract  require-
                  ments within the extended time span.
                                                   -3-

                    ATTACIIj\lEi\TT 1
                    Rationale for Visual Impairment Systems Analysis
                            Most military and civil law enforcement operations are
                    dependent upon normal functionina of the human visual system.
                    This fict applies to both military and civil offensive operations
                    as well as protection or countermeasures against the use of
                    light energy2 by hostile forces.
                            A brief review of light energy utilization to impair personnel
                    efficiency indicates periods of heiahtened research activity followed
                    by intervals of casual attention. Such accelerated R&D emphasis
                    has occurred in response to battlefield illumination requirements
                    anti-aircraft personnel incapacitation, protection against atomic
                    flash, pulsin2a light to produce confusion and disorientation, develop-
                    ment of and protection acrainst laser weapons, non-injurious systems
                    for crowd and riot control, as well as in response to other aperiodic.,
                    urgent situations.
                            In the area of handheld projectile weapons we can specify the
                    field requirements, turn to a data bank of ordnance R&D, and at,
                    least obtai2n a reasonable approximation of sys'tem specifications to
                    meet the requirements.  However, in the case of liaht energy and
                    the incremental course of visual impairment, w.e do not have such
                    a data bank. As a result, we are in a position of "fire fighting" as
                    requirements arise-or as the--consequence of scientific breakthrou 'ghs,
                    i.e., atomic energy, laser beams, retro-reflective optics, e2tc.  The
                    composition of the requirement is based uc)on a set of scenarios, each
                    of which may have unique parameters, and dictates the type of approach
                    which may be most feasible.  For instance, typical field situations
                    or scenarios for'which light energy has been suggested as a means for
                    personnel control are: non-lethal capture of military personnel or
                    civil arrest2 of an individual; dazzlina to permit automobile escape of
                    potential kidnap victim; to thwart aircraft and truck highjackina; crov.,d
                    .and riot control; and, from the military point of view, the utilization
                    of light enera  to facilitate stoppin,7 moving vehicles by incapaciLLatincr
                    the driver, neutralizing accurate fire power from a hostile bunker,
                    disablina ant5i-aircraft trackin(t cre@xis" prevention of barrier penctra't-.,.on
                    to a secure area, and battlefield illumination.  Each of these scenarios
                    has been investigated as a unique prol)leni or field reqtiireniciit \vitliolit

                    a sysicn-iptic analysis of the similarities and differences. Often  the
                    response to the individual requirement covers the complete cycle
                           -isic research to production. As a re ult, the process is
                    from b,                                     s
                    lengtl-iy, expensive, and frequently repetitive.
       2                    A-luch of the inefficiency with existing procedures would be
                    reduced if a systems analysis pro-ram  was  undertaken  ,vhich  would
                    provide a taxonomic base for diverse scenario requirements,
                    approaches, equipment, acceptable risk, etc.  For example, the
                    ambient illiirnination ,vithin which incapacitation must be accomplished
                    defines a m2inii-num brightness'Nvhich must be produced while the
                    anatoinical structure of the eye plus the risk of damage which the
                    situation allows define the maxii-num brightness.  The number of
                    personnel involved together with the possible demand for concealment
                    are important in the choice between pyrotechnic devices  and  optical
                    devices.  The wavelength of light emitted and the duration of i2nter-
                    mittancy of exposure can be controlled to produce a variety of effects
                    appropriate to the degree of risk one can assunie in the continuum
                    from dazzle to permanent retinal damage.  Utilizing the systems
                    approach, it should be possible to create a framework  within  which,
                    fragmentary advances can be preserved and structured so  as  to  pro-
                    vide a basis for initiating resp2onses to specific requirements on a
                    timely basis.
                          As a first step an extensive sample  of  scenario  requirements
                    must be analyzed to identify si-nificant parameters and  combinations
                    of parameters.  This would be followed by a study of the various
                    characteristics of 1"lahL energy and techniques of uses as they apply
                    to the scenario parametric  classifications2.  Subsequent  development
                    would include consideration of physioloc7ical and psychological effects,
                    equipment capabilities, countermeasures, system  factors,  and  other
                    variables which are identified as related to the selection of visual
                    incap-acitatina approaches for defined requirements.
                          A visual impairment systems analysis as outlined2 above would
                    not only be of major importance to diverse DOD  elemenls,  but  would
                  -also provide required data and research guidelines for many speciali7.ed
                    Governmental organizitions such -@s the LEAA, FBI, CIA, Secret Service
                    and civil la%,i enforcement bodies which should be coanizant of systems
                    for the protection or control of inclivicliials and groups b2y means of li-ht
                    oner,o;y. Such a pro,rrai-n %votilci provide a mitrix froi-n which efficient
                    and econon-iical P,&-D  ro-r,-tn-is could be -oncrate(i (or perhaps not
                                        p  i.              z:l
                    generated on the basis of tlio s3-,-tcrns analysis i3nformation) in terms of
                    the ipl)licatioiis and recILirci-notits of specific Govclilnmc.,iital or-aniza'Lions.

                                                                   VISUAL INCA11ACITATION SYSTEMS ANALYSIS*
                                                                                 III                      IV                    v              
VI
              Potential A,,)f)lications          Light Energy              Visual Systeni@*         Other System           Equipment          
Re c        t ir-
               2 qf Li-ht  Eiiergy  'Lor.     Physical Variabl@s                Variables               Factors           Stat-e of ArL
                 Personiiel Control
                   --------------            14avelength               Recovery Time                User Risk           Pyrotechnic           
]Zcscarcii Req.
                   --------------            Intensity                 Damage Risk          2        Emplacerrent       Electric Gas           
ProtcLype Dav
                   --------------            Duration                     Possil)lc.                Reliability        'Radiating     Body    
Test
                   --------------            Rise Time                    Temporary                 Logistics          Laser                  
Evaluation
                   --------------            Intermittent             2    Periiiainent              Covertness         Retroreflection
                   --------------            Flash Area                Component Affected                                 Size
                    ----------------         Visual Angle                 Lens Filming                                    1,.7eiglit
                                                                          Cornea Florescence'                             Power
                    2                                                      Tear Ducts                                      CGST,  etc.
                                                                          Retina
                                                                          Occipital Cortex
                                                                       Disorientation
                                                                       Pain
                                                          2             Occulomotor Spasm
                                       This sequence or format     for a systems analysis of visual impairment is not intended
                                       to  be  complete  or  even   suggestive   of   the   proper   approach.   Individuals   experienced
                                       in  the  area  of  systems  analysis  and  competent  in  the  field  of  physical   and   pliysio-
                                       logica2l  optics   could   undoubtedly   structure   a   more   appropriate   experimental   design.
                                       One of the major categories in a complete systeins analysiq should be some sort of
                                       a table,, chart, or other Lype of clear presentatio'n relating physiological visual
                                       impairn,ent  to  performance   efficiency.,   The   word   "impairment"   only   has   significance
    2                                   in regard to the efficiency with which a hostile individual(s) can perform a speci-
                                       fied task.  Vision may be reduced to 20/400 on the Snellen Chart, but the individual
                                       can still shoot a human target at 50 feet.  In.other words, somewhere in the systems
                                       analysis light energy, physiological impairment and certain classes of task dec3rement
                                       must be related.

