                      DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, EDUCATION, AND.WELFARE
                                        PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE
                                         21 March 1962
     Isaligool lwtitut* of M*Atal HeLitIL
       Aidktioe Rcieste), Cealct
      U.S. r,&blic He&Lth St-i- H-pita2l
        LezingwiL, ILientacky
            received-today  a bottle labeled 9-Amino'-l.,2 3,4-"L-.etrahydro-
          acridine.  On checking my  stock I find ("Jhat I have 5 grams
          of the material which was  obtained in October through Dr. Ray
          Shelton., Iiilliam S. Merrell & Co.,'and which is labeled
          tetrahydroami-noacrine.2
          This presumably is the same  material as that used  by  Samuel
          Gershon ("Blocking effect of tetrahydroaminoacrin-- on  a  new
          psychotorr@.1-metic.a,c@ent.," Nature 186-. 1072-1073, June 25., 1960).
          In that article tetrahydroaminoacr ne is designated 1,2,3,4-
          Tetrahydro-5-andnoacridine.  The structural formula given in
          the article howe2ver is identical with the structural formula on
          the bottle I redeived from the ADolications D@-z,velopm--nt Corr,-Oany.
          I presume that both the comoound I received from Merrell & Co.
          and the one you sent me are the same, and that the difference
          in naming is due to some differences in  the  conventions  for
          numbering the ring system.  However, would you please have the
          che2mist check this  for  me?
          Dr. Utterback spent yesterday and today with us.  I have tried
          to impart to him my philosodhy about clinical testing of new
          drugs, including the necessity for  measuring  things,  estab-
          lishing the reproducibility of the  measurements  made,  doing
          dose-effect curves, and making proper statistical designs.
                                         Kindest regards,,
                                    4     Harr s Isbell,, 14.D.
                                         Director
          Hl:rn

