                         Ar. tnALySIS OF-CMM"Sit7,IS El RUSSIAN @RIALS
                   OltIL*ITATI(Zt
                                                   trials  of  1937,  overt  Russian@
                        Since the notorious Y-oscow
                                                                        tic   trials
                     judicial procedure has beeii  aoteworthy  for  the  drwm
                     in rh-'Ach +.lie defcndants have exhibited anomalous and incmprehea-
                                                                       dmanner   of
                                                             istice   an
                      le-tiehavior and con-fesuiond.  Character
               2      the defendants, aud formulation and delivery of the c-infesa!Qnst
                     have been so similar in a,lelrt;e number of cases as to oulgest
                               ric-in.  rcat noteworthy and incredible has'Leen the
                     actitiuus 0
                     recent "coafeegiml of His Eminence Ca2rdinal Josef Minpzonty
                  .,.wh@le.on trial in the,.Peo lots  Court  of  Hungary  SW cAqrleA
                                            p
                         The evident incongruities prompted this study, the purposes
                     of v;hich were to analyze a numler of instances of trials and
                     confessions to invosti&atet
       2                      The overall pattern of the arrest# trial, and
                             perfor,nances of the members of the cast*
                         b,  The occurrence of any consistent or recurring
                             details of procedure or behavior*
                         c.  If tl,.e .41ore6uinG for,-.iod a oongruent pal@tern, the
                       2      mot4iod by Ythich the result was achieved.,
               2@    PROCEDUREI
                         Source material was widely diverse and reference is made to
                     si,-Aifica:it itemse  It become apparent at the outset of the study
                     that the styles context and manner of delivery of the "confessi=s"
                     were such as to be inexplicable unless th2ere had been a reozltlaaiza-
                     tion and reorientation of the-minds of the confessees.  Therti in
                     adequate historical exper'@ence to establish that basic changes in
                     the functional organization of the human mind canrot be lrought
                     about L-Y the tradit4A.=al methuds of physical,at-#Ort-Are--these a2t the
                     most, achieve a reluctant, temporarv yielding and, moreover, leave.
                     their mark upon the victim*
                         Newer or more sulitle tochriiques had, thererore. to be
                                                             Among the recornized
                     considered for the working hypothesis.
                     mettiuds are:
                          a* Psychosur-eryt a surgical s9eparation  of  the  frontal
                              lobes of the brain,,

               b.  Sliock method:
                   (1)  electrical
                  /(2)  drugs  metrasol, oanabin iadies, insulin, cocaine*
               Co. Psychoanalytic methods
                   .(I)  psychoanalysis
                   (2)  narco-analysiq &ad synthesis
                   (3)  hypno-mralysis and syntliesis
               do  Combinations of the foreCoin(;,,
               In.order to develop rroup patterns of behavior and interactions
          certain B'ACnificant elements were tabulated, Chart la

                                   MUDSZENTY
                   Rerression to infantile state of abject depoudency oii a
                    arental object (the State), characteristic of hypnosis
                   p
                   -(cotmistent with transference phenomenon), a basic chani;e
                      character structure result hnmosiso
              @2*  locessary to de  minat
                       Technique for dealing with resistance-repression
                       dynamism*
                   b*  Technique for obtaining  regression to specific age
                       level.
                   a*  Reconstruct the psychodynamice of the chance in the
                       functional orgaiiization of the patient*
                   do  How the procedure in acoolerated--resistances are
    2                   high--uaually require lonc periods for resolution and
                       full interaction with control (therapist)*
                   Repeated and prolonged hypnosis durinc which subject re-
                   conditioned unconsciously to his associational  sensations--
                   thus associated with personality suid character changes
                   Conditioninr, of sensation to extraneous, inocuous evc-nts
    0               (as key'words).
                   BAckZround: - Psychoanalysis aims at a reor-anization of
                   the mind*  Conscience was divorced from the standards
                   imposed in early life.

