                                    NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION (202) 962-4155
           N E A-IVS                         WASHINGTON, D.C. 20546 TETS: (202) 963-6925
                                               FOR P,,ELEfSE: FRIDAY P.M.
                                                            February 27, 1970
                                               (ALSO RELEASED BY STANFORD UNIVERSITY.
                              2                  MEDICAL CENTER, ST
                                                                  _A;,@FORD, CALIF.)
               RELEASE NO:   70-32
               EXTERNAL MONITOR CHECKS,HEART FUNCTIONS
                       Scientists from the Stanford University School of Medic-ne
                and the National Aeronautics and ISpace Administration's Ames
                Research Center successfully tested a new application of sonar
                (often called2 ultrasound) that can pry out secrets about the
                functioning of the human heart.
                       The new use of sonar, renorted today at the meeting of
                the American College of Cardiology, New Orleans, can provide
                fundamentals of the heartbeat andblood circulation heretofore
                unobtainable without passing a catheter (a long thin tube) into
                one of the heart chambers.
                        That procedure, known as car2diac catheterization, requires
                many hours and the patient is usually hospitalized. Addition   al
                 laborious procedures involve the taking of X-rays and blood
                 samplings.
                                                -more-
                                                                             2/25/70
                                                    A..pproved f or RelOa36
                          5                                27

                                           -2-
                   By contrast, ultrasound studies of the heart can be
             done by a well-trained person in the physician's office or at
             the patient's bedside in a.matter of minutes.  The technique
             can be applied as a screening procedure for patients with
             known or suspected heart disease.  And it can be used to monitor
             precisely the heart's healing process in patients recovering from
2             open heart surgery or from a heart attack.
                   -Unlike standard monitoring devices, sonar measures pre-
             cisely the amount of blood which is pumped out of the heart at
             each contraction of the heart muscle.  It also measures the heart
             size and the backward flow of blood which indicates that the
             patient has a defective heart valve.
                    The Stanford and NASA Ames (Mountain View, Calif.) researchers
             con2ducted sonar studies in 51 patients underooing standard
             catheter!-zation.  Their findings, obtained by ultrasound,
             correlated "reasonably well" with the derrree of heart disease
             detected by the standard method, they reported.
                    The work began as,a result of,interest by NASA in ultra-
             sonics as one of several techniques for using external instru-
             mentation for medical research during manned7 space flights, and
             coincided with interest in ultrasonics at Stanford.
                                            -more-

                                             -3-
                    The new use of sonar was described by Dr. Richard L.
              Pop@), a postdoctoral fellow in cardiology at the Stanford
              University School of Medicine, and Dr. Donald C. Harrison,
              associate professor and chief of cardiology at Stanford.
              Working with them on the project is Dr. harq,ld Sandler, chief
              of the Biomedical Research Branch of the Ames2 Center.
                     The Stanford work is supported by grants from NASA Ames,
              the National Institutes of Health and the American Heart
              Association.
                     NASA is seeking devices to collect and record information
              on human heart action during space flights, according to Dr.
              Harrison, the principal investigator.  Now that the use of sonar
               in heart monitoring has proved its value, work will begin to
     2          build ultrasound devices small enough to be carried in orbiting
               space laboratories.
                      In addition, scientists izill study the use of computers
                          @  retrieval and instant interpretation of ultrasound
               for storage,
               recordings received on Earth.
                      The instrumentation work will be done by researchers at
               NASA's Ames.  Testing of the new devices in human patients 8will'be
                conducted by Dr. Harrison and his associates at Stanford.
                       The sonar recordings on heart patients in the recent
                Stanford study were made by using a commercially available machine
                ,vihich emits and receives high-frequency sound waves.
                                              -more-

                     As sonic impulses were bounced against front and rear
              walls of the heart, they were recorded and converted into
              electrical signals which were displayed on a television screen.
                     From the patterns of ultrasonic echoes, taken when the
              heart is relaxed and when it contracts the researchers developed
              a formula enabling them to calculate precisely the volume of
              blood ejected by the hea2rt, and also determine the presence of
              abnormalities.
                     Dr. Harrison said that from a medical standpoint the
              technique is promising and warrants further investigation to
              refine it "because it is painless, simple and safer, and less
              costly to the patient than present methods."
                     Ultrasound is also being used at Stanford to detect
              heart changes that lead to early rejection in heart transplant
8
              patients.
                                             -end-

