                                               PROPOSAL
                                                for a
                               STUDY'OF THE SENSITIVITY AND RESPOf4SE
                                       OF WEAKLY ELECTRIC FISH
                                TO STATIC AND PULSO -4liAGNETIC FIELDS
                                          submitted by the

                     AIML
                                           PROPOSAL
                                                               'iSE
                            STUDY OF TliE SEt'ISITIVITY i@fID rESPOi
                                   OF IIEAI(LY ELECTRIC FISfl
                             TO ST'ATIC A14D PULSED i-lAGIIETIC FIELDS
                Backqt-ound.
             2                                          rticularly in the  various spe-
                    The study of bioelectrogenesis, pa
                cies bf electric fish, has been of increasing scientific  concern in
                recent years.  This interest stems primarily from the potential use-
                .fulness'of research in.this area in contributing to our understand-
                ing of i number of fundamental and significant problems.  By defini@g
         2       the electric fish's unique sensitivity 'to electric and magnetic fields,
                and how it codes and utilizes such sensory information in its detec-
             ,tion and navigation behavior, current evidenob is providing a more
                complete concept of such basic questions as migration and territorial-
                ity, and is leading toward the development of various bionic devices
                in the form of under@.jater sensors and po2wer sources.  In addition,
                knowledge of the effects of magnetic and electric fields on physio-
                logical and behavioral processes iias assumed great importance in viel't
                of man's exposure to drastic changes in such stimuli during  space
                @travel.
                    Living things produce a changing electric fip-ll at and near the
                surface of their. bodies; all fish, being sheathed in a conducti2ve
                substance and living in a conductive medium, produce an electric field
                that may be detected at relatively great distances.  However, there
                are certain fish which produce electric fields exceeding the norm by
                hundreds or thousands of degrees of magnitude.  The electric eels of
                the Amazon can produce bursts in excess of 600 volts. Other electric
                fish, i.e., weakly electric fish, produce continuous field2s measured
                only in millivolts, but by means of interpreting distortions in these
                fields are able to sense and navigate through their environment to a
                degree comparable to that of other species in which vision is used
                for these purposes.  The weakly electric fish,,having very poorly de-
                veloped visual abilities, must depend on information acquired through
                their electric fields in order to survive.
 2                   The magnetic field is a form of energy to  which  all  plants and
                animals are exposed. Its influence on  living  systems,  however, is
                subtle and not well understood.  One approach to  studying the effects
                of magnetic fields upon behavior is through the use of an organ-ism
                which produces an electric field and uses it as a detection and naviga-
                tion qiechanism.  The electric fish is just su2ch an organism, and a one-
                year s.tudy,                                                         .. I .i
                                    .1 of S'ternarchus albifr'o'n'-s"a-nu'-S. 'I'e'c)torhv'nchus,
                has demonstrated the feasibility of such @-iork.  In these species, im-
                pulses are discharged from the tail and received by the head, which
                b4ecomes positive in regard to the tail.  This potential difference
                creates an electric field about the fish's body, permitting it to de-
                .tect objects through distortions in the field.  Several studies have
                shown that these fish can perceive a static (con,,tant strength) magnetic
                field, but only when either the organism ot- the field is in motion,

                  therby generating a current in the fish.  It was thought that the
                  fish was responding to the current generated in itself by  the  magnet.
                  However, in these experiments the magnetic field was presented al,
                  a static field, and the sensitivity of -the fish to a pulsed field
                  presented at various frequencies, praticularly the  frequency  at
                  which the fish discharges its own electric field  2(500-1500  cps),  was
                  not investigated.  Other investigators have shc@vin drastic increase
                  in sensitivity to applied A.C. approximating the frequency of the
                  fish's  discha'rge.  In addition, the strength of the field was not
                  systematically varied in terms of the gauss level in  the  fish's  pro-
                  ximity, Therefore, there are considerable  gaps  in  our  knowledgq  of2
                  the degree of sensitivity of the fish to magnetic  ilields  at  various
                  frequencies and strengths.
                  @omplqted  And    osed Research.
                      In order to more clearly define the weakly electric fish's
                  sensitivity and responses to different types of magnetic fields, a
                  study was undertaken on June 1, 1969,  in  which  se,/eral  individuals
   2               of S. albifrons and S. leptorhynchus were obtained, life-support
                  tec'Fni'@ue-s dev-eloped-, and test and recording equipment purchased
                  and constructed. The fish were tested in a Y maze,  T  maze,  and
                  restraining chamber, and oscilloscope  recordings.were  made  of  their
                  discharge patterns over time, through variations in temperature,
                  and in response to various dru2gs including levodopa in a base-line
                  study.
                      Thier sensiti@ity to static and pulsed magneti-. fields exceed-
                  ing variations in the earth's magnetic fields was  observed  over
                  the following ranges of values: between I and  10  gauss  with  a
                  static field; from 0.29 to 82 gauss at 60 cps; and from 10 to 20
                  'Ganss at frequencies of 685-1220 cps. depending on the fish's o2wn
                  frequency. Apparent negative results  were  obtained  with  the  static
                  field; but the subjects were clearly responsive  to  the  pulsed  field
                  at all gauss and frequency levels. In addition,  a  method  was  devised
                  to administer the drug levodopa to the fish in order  to  determine  the
                  effects of this agent on their behavior.  Two  specimens  were  tested,
                  and the influence of the drug on their 2electrical  and  overt  behavior
                  noted.  However, the data are not complete enough to draw any firm
                  conclusions,  Since this study is currently coming to a close, and
                  the positive results wi)ich are emerging indicate  that  further  study
                  should provide very meaningful results, it is hoped  that  the  work'can
                  be continued.  It is proposed that the following lines of investigation
                  be   follow2ed:
                      A.  To determine the final absol-ute and terminal thresholds
                          of t@e fish's perception of a static magnetic field.
                      B.  To determine the final absolute and terminal thresholds  of  the
                          fish's perception of a pulsed magnetic field by varying its
                          freq@ency and strength over a wide range of values.
                      C.  To determine the fish's sensitivity to e5lectric current, as
                          a basis of comparison with his perception of  magnetic  fields.
                          In addition, to calculate the current generated in the  fish  by
                          magnetic fields, duplicate these values with  an  audio  signal
                          generator, and compare the results with his  performance  under
                          the other conditions.

                III.    fnabilities
                                                staff  consisting  of 42 full-time and    21 part-time
                        employees and four students working for the Ph.D. degree in infoma-
                        tion science.  Of this number of employees, two have M.D.'s, three
                        have Ph.D.'s and nine have the I-l.A. or M.S. degree or are otherwise
                        qualified to work at the professional level.,  The Droposed project
                        would be under the  irection of
                        is-a do:--toral candidate in psychology aod                'iis a graduate.'
                        @iologist working for the M.S. degree in ecology-
                               Laboratory facilities are available
                IV.     Plan of Procedure.
                               The work will be accomplished within six months from the       2 effective
                        date of the contract.  Five copies of a final report will be prepared
                        and submitted to the contracting agency.
               V.       @@et - 6 Months.
                               A. Personnel.
                                  Secretary (3%)
                                   -..,-.--Total P@@sonnel
                               B.' Fringe benefits* (16.5"I S&W)
                                  2Indirect costs (40.00 S&@l provisional)
                               C. Consultant fees
                               D. Travel - local
                               E. Reproduction & duplication
                               F. Supplies and expendible equipment
                               G. Equipment
                                        Total budget
                                 The total salary and wage amount shown herein provides        for direct
                    0           labor effort in the percentages for hours expressed herein for the
                               budget period.  The fringe benefit rate is a package rate which pro-
                               vides for several benefits including vacation and sick leave earned

