                   STUDIES IN TIIE kilLITAIIY APPLICATION OF IIYPNOTIShi: 1.  The llypiiotic hiesscilger
                   Introduction
                             Ilypnotism is now a recognized branch of the  science  of  psychology
                    operating under known  laws  producing  known phenomena.  The proposals we
                    are about tb.make can be  veri2fied  by  means of the scientific method.
                             In deep hypnotism  or  somnambulism, tile subject has complete amiiesia;.
                    he remembers nothing of  what  has  happened.  One out of every  five  persons
                    can reach this depth in the hypnotic trance.  With this subject, we c,.in,
                    remove from him all knowledge of ever having  been  hypnotiz2ed  ind  -make  it
                    ,impossible for anyone else to liypnotise )iim except a person who h  as  been
                    designated by tile hypnotist.
                             It is our contention t'liat a long and iiivolved message given  to  a
                       subject could be recovered from the unconscious mind only by one specific
                     operator, who alone would be able to hypnotize the subjec2t and recover the
                                                                the subject would have no ktiowled,re
                      secret". message.  In the waiting state,
                      of  this message.  lie would deny his ever having been hypnotized, aiid the
                      second hypnotist would be the otily person able Lo ro-hyl)z-iotize him.  lie
                      would  go to this2 second operator as a result of the post-liyl)notic sugge-stion
                      of an  ordinary military  transfer.  lie would not "talk" becau s..c he has
                      nothing to talk about.    Furthermore, it is our contentioti  that  alcohol,
                                                                            ful ill i-ccoveriiir, this
                      drugs,  and/or ptiysicnl du1ress would not be success
                      message.

                    Stil)JCcts:
                           Twenty somnambulits who miglit, l,r, obtairied in a military ,tblislimezit
                    will be used. College students ctntiot be used in this exi)crimeiit for quite
                    obvious reasons.  The criteria for somnambtilism are definitive and clear-cut.
  2                  The so-called disguised teclinique will be used so tli,.it the I)ei-sotinel will be
                    in ignorance of the reason for b&itig contacted.
                    Equipment:
                           We will need facilities for doing hypnotic work uzidcr conditiotis which
                    give maximal security.
                           The actu,.xl -ii)))2aratus involved will be: (1) dictaj)liotic, (2) tn apparatus
                    to test hypnotic anesthesia by means of the api)lication of a graduated electric
                    current, or the iise of an electroonceplialograpli.
                    Procedure:
                           The tweiity subjects selected for their ability to enter the somnambulistic
                    state wi2ll be carefully trained for the specific task in mind.  As mentioned.
                    previously, we will removelfrom each subject all knowledr,,e of ever having been
                    hypnotized and make it impossible for anyone except the person designated by
                    the hypnotist to re-liypnotize him.  Ile would then be itistructed as to the nature
                    of his assignment, namel2y, that he would be given materi-.il which is "secret"
                    and wliich could not be divulged to anyone, either in the waking state or any
                    type of unconscious statei   The exception to this would be a second liypnoti'st
     t              (specificsLIly named) who would be able to re-liypiiotize him and recover  ttic
                     secret" information.
   3                         The ".c;ecret" material would then be presented to the   subject.- This
                    would be given by tape recording for the sake of coiitrolling    human voice
                    variables and -would be repeated five times in five separate hypnotic sessions,

             out of the trance and send him to his desitna-
 the subject
                                     the second  hypnotist)
 tion (in this case, the address Of
                                ggestion.  In the waking state,   i
 by means of a  post-hypnotic  Su
                                t.  At this point,  over-,a
 ,owledge of the second  hypnotis
 which under normal circumstances would give him ample    time
       -the 2world, we                     nt methods to  elicit
 )art of              would apply differe
 iation, by use of his wife, girl friend,  alcohol, arnytal or
 ,en physical duress.
 -ic principal investigator at $50 a day.
 days a month for three months.                      $ 3,000.
 ssoc                                                  2,400.
     iate at $40 per day
 nses for these two men  $12 per day                   1,400.
0 penses indeterminate
      -time  secretary.                                   500.
  part
                                           .This man could be
 L psychiatrist should also be available.
 ;tablishment.
   project  approximately $10,000.
                             -L of this proposal would require
 lat a thorough investigatioi
                     the principle investigator and his associate
 ag the summer when
 m academic duties.

