                                                                  29 December  1955        'Z
               NE'1,40RMUM FO',i-. TBE PECORD
               SUBJECT:           Visit with Dr. Isbell   at Lexingto-,i., Kentuci@.-,r
                     1.  one  purpose of  this visit was  to introduce            to  Dr.   Isbell
               and!to get the-benefit of Dr. Isbell.rs  2  knowledge and  experience in the
               alcohol problem. This was  done  and  will  be  covered  by  P  (@)(9.ls  report.
                     2. In the antidote work  on  LSD,  Dr.  Isbell  redorted  that  he  had
               conducted several =re  tests  with  Frenq@wl  under  "4h;  supervision  of  Dr.
               Fabking and under  true  double  blind  conditions.  He  said  that  although  he
               d2oes not yet have the dose key back from Y-,errill and Co., none of the doses
               produced  effects  vhichvou"-dlead  him  to  believe  any  antidote  effect  had
               been found..  He said also that so -Lar the partial blocking effect of
               chlorpromazine is the only clue in this field.
                     3.  NIH still'is pursuing   the work on  bufotero-ne  and  after  working  up
               to I gram 2of Cohoba Snuff with    .no effects in the men but sneezipg, Dr.
               Isbell reports that he has gotten up to ni-iite@'.aigh doses of bufotenine I.V.
               ,with no results as, yet.  He said th--t F    ing told him  that  he  had  worked
               up to doses of ittthat caused the men to  turn  blue  in  the  face  at  i;hich
               point a  short-li-ied  psych2otid  episode  was  precipitated.  In  addition  to
               this work, NIE has sent Dr.' Isbell a quantity of  Rivea  seeds  for  tea-,"ling
               in his men. These came from Dr. Kety,, who described the e-.'LL@ects  'k..%at  were
               obtained by Dr. Cochin of ZEE using a hot 1-,N -HC1  extract  of  the  seeds  in
          2     animal tests on         r4t6 , pigeons, and dogs-'.  The  chief  reactions  see--ed
               to be sedation ,with catatonia and  azi@a:loesia  without  producing  sleep,  dila-
               tation of pupils, and anorexia. There-seemed to  be  a  @ride  r.%-rgin  bet-ween
               effecti-%,e andl@athal :iose 2and effects were obtained  with  -=ounts  o-r  the
               order of 50 seeds per dog indicating a relatively high potency.  I described
               our progress in this field to Dr.  Isbell  and  he  agreed  to  give  us  the
               results of his tests and to test the gluco-al-laaloid which was obtained from
               Rivea by Dr. Cook when it has been run on anirlals.
                     4. In connect2ion with small  ani=l  testing,  Dr.  Isbell  said  that@,  he
               felt that the hallaci.-.ato.-y drugs could certainly 'ce  screened  in  such  a
               way. He pointed out t',_.at the psychologists  at  the  hospital  had  zrccluced
               =phetamize hallucinations in their  conditioned  rats  such  that  -L6,he  rats
                     -push an im-agin2ea-,@ bar in the SK@,ier box and-eat im.  inary foc. .  Also
               vould-                                                         ag
               "IC felt that the 1-ss of wildness and bit  . -e
                                                            ina - fle- in-ra'%"a
                                                                                  monl-,eys, e4,-
               a2s veli as other indica-4ions, suggested by Dr. Felikan were valid. indicators
               of haliucina'or-I acl@, i, -; i4.'I' .
                     5. 1 asked Dr. Isbell  about  the  use  of  1-dromeran  as  an  alcohol
               extender and he agreed that this  should  be  ef@0ective  and  cuite  safe.  Cre
               noted that Ho2ofrzn La Pochp- has a le-w de:-ivati,.,e
               which is 3 times as poten-@.- as 1-d..-cm3r= and should also be o.-al:-,7
               He agreed to test this.  We also discussed the use of this mp-%"eri-c-I
               reserpine and scopola:nine in conjunction  with  cliloral  in  the  K  material.
               He reco=aendea @,hat I s'@-.az-t so=e animal work on such materials
                                                          Clasa"f '4d
                                                       Vate

                                                       2
                that reserptt,.e should potentiate  chloral and   alcohol as well as  baroit'lurates
                and that the poluentia'L-lion might  be in duration and/or'depth of sleep.
                                                       rl -i-ta T Cn Lrm"l:- %i-t 1 1'hom
                          A .--"rt c-  the  rese--Pi--                         _IVEtila'nlft c
                There  appears  to  be  a  potentiation of the LSD@effect such  that  in  so"-,e
                                         -iven in 3  - 2 rZ.- portions I.M. d,.irinsZ,; 24 hours
                cases 6 mg. reserpine g
                prepedin- 60-Ug@-i. LSD brou,!-ht2 on reactions usually seen at about 'the
                150 Ugm- level of LSD.  Dr. Isbell wants to de' -mine whe4,her or not the
                usual tolerance to LSD can be ,voided by combination with reserpine before.
                he.-finishes his study.
                     7.  A number of other mat'L-lers were disposed of   during  the   meeting.
                These included the ordering of arother gram of LSD, 2     plans to test the Lilly
                m--,terial as soon as Dr. Pfeiffer has finished with it, and plans to check
                suspected va--iations in T)o"6.ei@cy of various'batches of Sandoz LSD.
                     8.  Finall.,f., I gave D-r. Isbell a briefing on  our  relationship   and
                projected plans As-a-vis  Dr.  Baldwin  and  asked  him  for  his  oninion  on
                this approach to our mroblems    sugges'o-.in,7 at the same time that he  might
                wish to talk- to Dr. Wikler about it. He agreed that Dr. Wi':;.ler would be
                able to give us som-ft sound help in  arriving  at  a  decision  and  indicated
                that his oa-a first feeling about the program was that it would be of value
            2    to us in many va,-f:C-,remem@,ering at the same time that it would be a la.-Se
                and costly undertaking rhich.no doub@L6, ,,rould have to run for an  exten,-4ed
                period in time.  He also felt that IfI7. should be willing to bear considerable
                of the cost though..
                                                            9      TSSld6 mical Division.
                Distribution:
                 Oris & I    TSS/CD
                                                          t)ec raspified b-y

