                      V4C7
                                                                     5 February 1973
                        MEKOFANDUM FOR:
                        SLTBJECT:
                              INTRODUCTION
                              The following observations and opinions pez-tain to:
                                   a.  the concept of rield effect
                                        monitoring
2
                                   b.  the equipment delivered by the
                                   c.  suggestions for further research
                              STATEMMT OF THE TEC=QUE
                              A abort antenna (.e.g... 18" of wire mouzted vertically irx the air
                        above an insulating support) viil take on an electrical potential which
                        will var_v in response to the 2time variation of the electrical field in
                        its  vicinity.   In   particular,
                                              )cause cyclic variation of the potential on the antenna
                        which  correlates to the                                                   .1 con-
                        sider  the instantaneous potential on the antenna to be a scalar, uniform
                        over the surface of the    antenna (its length is very2 much smaller than the
                        wave length of the signal, e.g., 60 Hz has a wave length of 3100 miles).
                              The amplitude of the signal is a,function of the magnitude of the
                                                      the           @antenna distance  the relative
                        humidity, the                             /the degree of static charge of the
                                                2    jto nane just a few.  The signal frequency range
                        extends from DC i-o"i'es-s than 100 Hertz.

                               :,Il@UTATIONS OF TliE TECHNIGLTE
                               A major problem with using such an antenna to intercept
                                             is its sensitivity to extraneous signal so@arces.  It
                          would be useful to select one-out of a set of potential sources by means
                          of sozle appro-,oriate combination of shieldin2g or enhanced directivity of.
                          the a-itenna.
                               Antenna theory suggests that directivity cannot be er.!,,L-,,iced by
                          means of atitenna configuration for all practical purposes t-ecause the
                          anterl-ia size and the spacing between elements of = antenna array wil3.
                          alway2s be vanishingly -all compared with a -wavelength.  The wave
                        .Ienkth of 100 Hz wave is:
                                         c = 3XI08 m/see
                                                 sec-.L       OOOkm
                               Therefore, shielding or shaping of the field must be used to
                          advantage if possible.
                               Another present limita2tion of the technique is the lac@i of know-
                          ledge required for reliable interpretation of the signals acquired.
                                   @imformation should be reliable gi-en an adequate signal-to-noise
                          ratic, but waveform analysis for detection and evaluation           iwou=ld
                          require considerabl@- additional researc..,.  (@!his comme2nt is made prior to
                          receipt of the                    ]Final Report.)
                               Finally, since the antenna sits in the near field of the source,
                          signf-ls received will fall off as the cube o- the distance.  If the
                          sign&l is tangential at 1 me,'@ler, the signal will be 18 db down at
                          2 meters, and 28 db down at 3 meters.
2                               Signal-to-noise ratio is critical whene-,rer data recording is done
                          on a machine of finite dynamic:range.  (The TFAC recorder supplied has
                          a dynamic range of about 35 db.@
                               THE         ILR
                               The         iequipment received from th--                  _jwas
                          brie7-'ly 2evaliiited.  The unit performed much as expected, azid @rds able
                          to provide outputs clearly showing                                  from
                          a                las distances up  to about I meter-," -TEe'-s-;'-gn-ay 'j-dality
                          rapidly deteriorates with  increasing range, as expected.
                               The unit has a rather poor battery 9life, rated at three hours in
                          the instruction manual.
                                                        -2-

                          The operating time could be approximately trinled by instal-
                     ling larger battery parks i.-i the unused snaces o-' the case.  A
                     suggestion:  if battery life is a serious consideration, and ttie
                     unit undergoes design revisions, replace the circuitry with micro-
                     power components.  Newly available operational amplifiers can run
                     on 2as low as 1.75 volts, drawing a few hundred microvatts.  The
                     present equipment, exclusive of the recorder, re-quires about 1.9
                     watts.  The tape recorder draws about 2.4 watts.
                          The unit is rather inconvenient to operate since it requires
                     battery v@-placement prior to each use, and a car?eul set-up of gain
                     controls under conditions closely approximating 2those expected operationady@
                     'As previously noted, the signal amplitude is quite range dependent and pro-
                     ba'oly varies considerably with envirormental cir:@@=stances such as the
                                          Automatic gain controls or logarithmic amplifiers
                     should be considered in order to optimize uee of the tape recorder's
                     dynamic :range.
7
                                                    -3-

