                        MEMORANDUM
                        8 June 1970
                        TO:            Dr.
                        FR OM;
                        SUBJECT:       Preliminary Proposal: "Non- Lethal Personnel
                                       Behavioral Controlli
                        Four copies of a pfoposal, "Non-Lethal Personnel Behavioral
                        Control, 11 dated 15 May 1970, are submitted for you2r considera-
                        tion. We would like to emphasize that the exploratory nature
                        of the work proposed makes it important that the task descrip-
                        tions and manpower allocations outlined in our proposal be
                        considered flexible within the framework of funding and manpower
                        available. Some degree of flexibility is necessary to avoid
                        wasting effort on techniques that prov5e to be impractical and to
                         ermit follow-through on prom'l@sing approaches to non-lethal
                        p
                        personnel behavioral control.

         k3
                                   ,NON-L-ETHAL PERS   NEL
                                     BEHAVIORAL CQNTROL
                                            15 May 1970
                                         REVI.EW DRA-FT

                            REVIEW DRAFT
                                                   NON-     LE                  L
                                                             THAL PERSONNE
                                                     BEHAVIORAL CONTROL
        r
                                                      lpropoaas to provide medical a'nd
                            evaluation,  advice and  guidance  to  support'developmen.t  of  be2haviorzl
                            ccntrol systems being  fabricated  and  tested  by  other  concerns  and/cr
                            to recon-xmend the development or  abandonment  of  plans  to  undertake  -
                            research  and  development  concerned  with  potential  behavioral  contyol
                            systems.  This service is to be rendered during the contract period of
                            I July 1970 to 30 June 1971,2 subject to modification if the contract
                            objectives would @e better served by a change in the contract time
                            period.  A proposed budget for the corltract is detailed in Table I of
                            this proposal.
                                                             TASKS
                            The proposed tasks  are  described  below.  Contract  work  is  to.be'per"-
        Li EU               f2ormed by the medical, para-medical and technical staffs of approl>riat(
                            depa'rtmenis                                principally   the   Departments
                            of Experimental Psychology and Physiology, Comparative Environmentz
                            Biology and Biolcigical Instrumentation.  Existing.
                            facilities will be used for classified storage and communications, as
                       2     appropriate.  Clinical consultations fron-. appropriate            speciali@
                            will be obtained as indicated if clearances are granted or the subject
                            material can be discussed at an unclassified level.  Key personnel i-n
                                                                             a  ea
                                                                              lr  dy  hold   clearances
         2                      he  SECRET  level  or   higher.
                            at t
                            I. Evaluation of
                            Evaluation of status, progress and potential  of  on-going  projects  being

                            RR.VIENV DRAFT
                                                                                                t  develcl.-
                            conducted  by other organizations.  These projects are aimed a
                            ing auch approaches as intense light and adhesive rnaterials as
                            control systems.
                                  30@'o of research e2ffort
                                  Informal and formal Progress Reports due: intermittently, whey-,
                                  requested or indicated.
                            11.  Evaluation of the Scientific Literature in "Soft Irn]2act" Proiectile
                            Evaluation of the currently available literature and recent research
                            eff:)rts in order to det.ermine the feasibility of developing a  "soft  impac2t!'
                            projectile as a part of a behavioral control system.
                                  ZO'7o of research effort
                                  Progress Report due:  28 February 1971.
                            III. Evaluation of Potential Behavioral Control Techniques
                            Evaluation of  diverse  approaches,  such  as  electrical  shock,  infra-soudcf,
                                                                2         as potential methods  of  tarnfc@,@
                            nets,
                            rary incapacitation.
                                  307a of research effort
                                  Progress Report due: 30 June 1971.
                            IV. q@ippor                       es
                            Exploratory laboratory studies involving experimental animals will be
                            conducted, as appro2priate, in support of Ta:sks I - IV if data from such
                            studies are necessary to supplement information from other sources in
                            order'to arrive at an evaluation of a potential behavior control system.
                                 20'7o of research effort
                                 Reports due: upon completion of studies.
                                                   ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES
                            Br9iefings and support functions such as security, communications, per-
                            sonnel management, travel (est)ecially in the early phases of operation)

                         REVIEW DRAFT
                         and administrative activities wiU be necessary,  Such activities are
                         estimated to require about 20@o of availa@le professional manpower,
                         The remaining 800/o of irofessional manpower will be apportioned to
                         the four task,% as indicated above.

                                                 TABLE I.  BUI)GET.ESTIMATE
                                                                  for
                                                               Proposal Dated 15 May 1970
                       Description
                                                                            Man Years             Amount
                                               lsalaries
                            Dr.
2                                                                                0.10
                            Dr.
                                                                                0.  10
                            Dr.                                                 0.  30
                            Associate Staff Members                             0.  50
                            Technical Staff Members                             0. 2 so
                          ap2lies
                            Office supplies, communications, books,
                            library services, liboratory supplies,
                                                 al
                            expez'imental anirn  s including mainten-
                            ahce@@
                                                s:
                            Appropriate              ISPecialists2, 40
                            hours at
                      Travel:
                      Er-ialft_Eenefits at 127* of salaries (rounded).,
                     .2,ve@rho@a@L at 437o of salaries (rounded):
                       Includes leav
                                      a benefits -and bonus cornpensation.

