                                                                        15 Jaimary 1952
                 10,,UR.&IMUM  FOR:                              To
                 ,@UDJ.CC,T       i Use  of  a  Chemical  Compourvi
                       1.  About a month agoj                 asked me if  we  could  give  Iiim
                 arW information on nicotinic acid.  We       have made a nu2mber of discreet
                 inquiries and have turned up information as noted herein.  This in-
                 formation comes from one of the most prominent pharmacologists in the
                 United States,,  We are raking further inquiries of sources recomrnnded
                 1,-y the irylividual ,Tho provided  this  irxforinition.  One  source  in  par-
                 ticular is reported to b2e doinr,, researeli in nicotinic acid and we may
                 obtain evan more useful information.
                       2.  The information pi-ovided is as followst
                                  The co=on use  of nicotinic  acid  is  as  a  vitamin;  it  is
                                  used principally  as  a  preventotive  for  pellagra  (a  skin
                                  affection i-rith severe 2constitutional and nervous syrptons)
                                  in  the  southern  part  of  the.US.  Its  therapeutic  action
                                  in these cases is in developing a psychosis and dilating
                                  the blood vessels.
                                  9ince nicotinic acid is a peripheral dilator of blood
                                  ve.-selsj it mi2glit also be iL-3ed in the treatment of frost
                                  bite but there is no pub3.ished' indication that this t@,pe
                                  of therapy has ever been developed ar7where.
                                  Iiis staff has done much work   on using a combination of
                                  nicoi-,inomid with privine for  the treatment of schizophr2enic
                                  patients.  Privine is a nicotinic acid inhibitor (B 45) and.,
                                  -,lthour-h very lethal in @Lnintlsj is not poisonous for
                                  Inm,,in-beings*  The nicot:Lnomid-privine combim-ition produces
                                  a rhmk reretion i;iiicli does not in%,olve conviLI:3iorm.
                                  Perin, (,,nts in this have bcen mide an patients at a Ftat@o
                                  ilospital nearby but are no longer being 'c,-,rried an because
                                  of the lnek of f=lq @rnd the dif2fiaLtlty in tr.-tv-el betw2een
                                  the vic(lic-U collf,-,ge laboratories rrx-I the hospital,
                                  'ilia -,ource did not know of other doctors or 1,3.L)or@-itories
                                  in tila U7- or abroad vaio were worklnr, with this nicotinomid-
                                  rivine combination or other 5nicotinic acid coitpow-ids.  Ile
                                  p
                                  could not recall having seen any publications on this subject.
                  osi/

