                 ?IO. 44
         Office     Meilioran M I UNITED STATES'GO\rEl@NMENT
                                                                                     1-3
                  'Chiefi, Security Research Staff                                   54
        TO
        FROM      Chiefy Technical Branch
        SUBJECT:  Attached
                       A            with is a self-expl=atory mmorandum of@@
                          0            connection with the recent work done here
                                            I am certain the work was vtry profitable
                  and as far as I can tell,                   as i  resse
                  appreciated the opportunity of working 'wit
                          77-

                                CD
                           LIN
              L-J
                                                                    41;C
            ;7C
                                La
                                C2
                t>l
                                                                                                      4t
                                             6                                                                                                 
Irv,
                                oz
                                     L) 4-)
                                                                                                                                               
LO
                                     4-4 s@4
                    C3                  LO

                                                                5      1955
                 MDICRPliDU I FOR:
                 MM.T.ECT:      EYpnotiam and Covert operationa
                       *1 apologize for (3,Lil)initting a (locunent cLs long ns tll4l Olle.
                      J' t Jr, higlily contr6versial 2and even thin treatmcnt, -,Iliicli
                 The sub cc
                 may appear long, is abbreviated.
iiv
                    2.  Frankly,  3: no-,r distrust Tmcli o-C 'wllnt Is writtcn  acadenac
                 experts on bypndtism.  Partly this is because many of tbl-m appear to
                 have generalize'd:i'xtm a ver                                h of their
                                              few  cases; partly because muc
                 cautioue pessimism -i's contrndicted by Agency experimenters; but more
                 particulzrly because I personally have witnessed behavior re'sponGet3
                 wILich respe6ted experts have gaid a2re impossible to obtain.  Ia no
                 other field have I been so cobsciousiqf the moiltal claustrophobia
                 of book and lecture hall kacwlcdge. 'I donl.t thinll we ha-m enau&h
                 evidence to say positivrly that hypnotism is a practicable coN-p-r-t
                 wenponl but I do sa2y that we'll never know wlie-ther it is or not unlcsa
                 we experiment in the field where ve can learn vhat is prncticablo
                                  sychologically) ia a way that no laboratory worlter
                 (materially and p
                 could possibly prove,
                         Even the torminolo
                                             Cy of hy2pnotism Is in conrusion.  I linvi-
                 used tertra like "suggestibility", "catalepsy" snd @'faE;cirmtion"
                 becnuse they seemed to r@,c descriptive, but these nre or6med to bc
                 inaccurate in cur-rent journals.  As an examp1c of the confunion,
                                 and2 I spent the better part of tvo dnys arguing with
         o4      an academic practitioner of formidable reputation before we discovered
                 that bis vehement and perplexing disngrement witb what we knev to
                 be facts was based on oemantic hair-splitting and congealed pig-
                 headedness.
                          Ifyou decide that the                 pursue this subject
                 furtlie8r,, I suggcat that you irce
       A@A
                                            and myself t@o discuss the first recoL-.Pcn(lation
                 of the attached pckpcr.
                 Attnclrmcnt
                 Disi;ri.bu C-)n:
                   Orig. -  Atlt-lrcE3GCe
                         -  C Securit

                              Tliii3 paper briefly describes liy]dnotiom ar, it hns 'Uccn ugcd
                      in medicine, the laboratory and an the stage; some adaptaticna wlilch
                      may make Jmt uacnble in covert operations; nnrl      clandeatine
                      operational r@,.ucnrcli requiremcnts.  2rirne rcader eliould.,keep in )i@ind
                      that ve are here dealing with aspects of htimnii beliavior wllitli do not
                      permit &atliematicall@r..exact definitious or clasaifications.
                      1.  MNOTISM
                           A'.  'What Is It 7
                           IlypnotiGm is a 2atnto of exncgcrated or heif@liteued ougaestibility.
                      It is a mtural mental condition which superficinlly resembles sleep
                      and Me zlc-op it can be induced by suggestion.  It is characterized
                      by extreme responsivrness to suggestion and heiglit-ened 9-tiriLlation of
                      the imagination.   During hypnosis, the aut2onomic nervous system   nnd
                      the unconscious mind can  be reached and, within distinct but not
                                                                          -tor.  Whatever degree
                      tlioroughly understood limita,, affected by an opera
                                          evelcrpcd is not cnly effective during hypnosis but,,
                      of control can b2e d
                      throygh a phenc=mn    knawu as post-h-ypxiotic suggestion, may in favorable
                      circumstances be extended  into subsequent waking stafcs ea well.
                           The pro@--oso- of iiulucing Ilypr,.ooia appears to place the.cousciouci
                      mind in a s-tatd of suspended animtion at2-4 to permit an operator to
                      reach and affect the unconacioua mind directly. In th.is omy the conscious
                      mind of a good subject can be affected witlioiit his being a,,mra of 1-.cnr
                      pr why; for in the deepest stages of hypnosis, the subject nny li3ve

                                              'IT
                            m-iio,rlsll Almcovn
                      HYP'ROTISIA
                      A,  @Tbat Is
                          vnio Cin BP- Hypnotized?
                                duction of, -IlipnoGic;
                      C.  The  IV
                               pre-T,              stibility
      2                             ,sting -for Su,,7,,c
                          2,   Induction Procedures
                                  'VerbQl Suggestion
                                                   jerbal Sugges,tion
                               bo Fascination plus
                               C. Varco-aypuosis
                               Awnkening
                               Post2-HYPnOtIc Suggi ations
                               Age RcgressiOn
                       D.  other Factors
                           1.  wliat Makes FA Good Subject?  tor?
                           2.  What Cllnracterized a Good OPera
                           3-  stages of Hyrnosin
                                           notism"
                           4.   ,invo o2f ITYP               gairiat His Will?
                               Can a Subject be liypnotized A
                  11.   AFPLICATI(7il Of IlypNOSIS To COVERT OPMATIONS
                        A. Diaguised rre-Testing
                        B. Disguised ind'uclion
                        C. specific Operational SituatiOna
                        RESEARCH
                9                   COTICLuslais
                             @lu4DA
                     v. BEc%,&    TIOTTS

                                           'V                    Lnxid the origin
              enmesia both for the fact of ha lnr, .1)( n l'iypnoti7,cd
              of whatever new iden or impettia to action has bcen intlantcd in  hi3
                               II(3 8 ju,                         I 0     is   cvn
              unconsc2iouo niilid     ply ponac(3set3 na a develcpm,@-i t  f "b
              free will"                             ver ldens and motives liave
                        as f ar as he is aware,,  Whate
              been succt-nefull@y trausplnn4@'ed into his unconscious du-ring the hypnotic
              process; though for how loiig -nnd with who t tiiodiric,,itions by lils  o,,m-a
                                                                           'k
              personality ovcr loi@g periods of tima are no"6 lniown.
                 B.  @lho Can'.Bc Hr
                                    notizedl
                 Suggestibility  is a ebimeteristic of the no-@mml mind and it seems
       2       possible,, evcn.,Iikely, that all normal persons could be hypnotized if
              Om possessed adequate techniques.
                 There are differences of opinion  amon4,,, prnctitioners ns to @6lie
                                                                   he    ha
              percentage of,normal persons vho are susceptible to t   tec   iquea
          2    nov in comon use. Childrea  and  youtha from 7 or 8 to 13 are generally
              good subjects.  Of adults 2 mos;t Trredical and laboratory ,rorlcers Eicccl)t
              a figure of 1 out of 5 no cspable of en@tering the deepcc;-t     on
              the first induction.(l)  This fib-ure iG-Aarei3 ]pre-testing for sascc:ptibility
              iand., so far as I could determine,, is derived froni the use of a single
              favored method of lnd@ction by various experimentcra.
              1.  Those figures were derived frcxa expcrimen-to using peoplcs of Cc.ntral
                                                                        nomenon   -,bougli
              and Wei2itern Europcnn origin.  Bcr?mver,, liypnotism cia a phc
              not alwnys under that nn-,,ne - has been noted in tlio 3.i@ilerature of India,,
              Cbirxi, Japan, etc.  Thero io probably little diffcrence iii suaccptibility
              on the acore of racial origin, al@x or rocictl cl-ngs, altliou(,-b tix3:,nlly
                                                                            rw
                                                          6-o local traditions.
              Wuction tecimiquea uacd differ according A
                                                             =WOE"

                 gmrc stnge operators claim 4
                                                  u4esnco out   of 5 ottcmp-a using
            dioguise(I pre-tenting to nolect goo4i niii@iccts and sevf@rnl
            mctl)ods of inductioa used in rotation should one    tietliod fail.
                 As a working liypothesii3,, I believe 2that we  need not quexrel at
            this time  $ith an estimate by-a professiotvil operator 'vit,@i all-(;Gt 30
            years c     crience wliois also familiar na a consultant with some*-Of
                   xp
            the operational   problems of  this Agency.  lie believes that with skilled
            operators, an array       induc.@Fion techn2iques and  disguised  pre-testing,,
            we should expect success with a minimum of 1 out of 2 selected sub-
             jects.  With di7uCa,, of courset the per'een-tage should be much   hig@icr.
                  C.  llqie Iii,.Iuction of Hyptionia
                                                                              is
                  2Thex,%-- are a large number of methods of inducing ITypnos      U'Oat
             of which use variations of the follo-ving general approaches.
                         1.  Pre-Testing for Suggestibility
                         We are all familiar with situations in ,rliicii the thoii.-Jit or
                   idea  of a thing or condition can evoke liu=n resporises very
                   like  those which would occur  if  the  stimulus  vere  "real"  instrad
                   of "imaginary". ;For exnmpla:  salivation at the eight or miell
                    of food   fear and discomfort at the thought of being stung or
                    bitten by a snake,   spider or hornet; yp,,mirL,, wlicn ottieri do; etc.
                           Some people nre2 much more susceptible to aii!TGcstloils of
                     tliia nature tlinn  others.  Stage.hlpnotiatG  li3ve  for  years  taken
                    advtint-qge of the apparcnt hil.7,h correlntiqn betwcen waking auS@,esti-
                    biliti and  hypnotic  ousccptibility  to  pre-tent  nudiciices  before
                    selecting  oub4ccts.

                iro:@ exrimple, one vcll-luio-,rn attif,-,c liy-p'notiat carries alemon
           In Iiia pocket arid., no part o-f h-in in-@rodiicticrn, says:
                "Nov please direct your attention tcr.,ards m and toi,-,irtla tlii3
           yellow) juicy., bitter lemon.  Itla such a sou2r, bitter lemon.
           take this tni-LOc and cut through ito rind.  Look, at the juice, that
           solix bitter juice dripping (Iolwn 'to the floor.  Nov I'm goin@; t-
           suclc t'liat sour, bitt4r Icooti juice. (Sucks il-. audibly)  SeA, it
           is bitter and taftl   So sourl :And as I suck it notice bo,.r your
           zmths begin to fill vith an-liva--hov they wnter!
                 And so on.. Meanwhile he ta on the alert for unconscious
            reactions                             e
                      on the faces of p-ople in th@ audience.  The ones who
            screv up their faces, si4allov saliva., Crimace in distaste are tlx
            ones he tries to coax an the stage far progressively more intens2ive
            pre-teata of suggestibility.
                 This ir. an example o-f sugr-stion and pre-tcating of the ri.TLplt,-ot
            sort.  Obviously it is riot cidapted to apex-aticrtial use by a clnndcstinc
            servicao except in the unlikely event  that a stage 2erformance of
            -@yptiotiom can be utilized as part of the cultivution of a potentia"@
             agent.  Later  en this-paper will be found a few pre-tests and induction
              rocedures  which utili--e the rame principles but which are translated
             into more familiar agent recruitment routines.
                  The point to beer in mind in that disguized prc-testing appcnrt
             to be practicable and would b1e indispeimable in tlit-- sclection of &,rood
             hypnotic subj(,cto without @oin.g aware that a toot of aiiy kind had been
              2.  The roader may notice some reaction ca his (A;n part to this dialogue.

                         2.  Incluctioxi 1ro<,cdilrcs
                         G-cnerally tliree types of itidiiction are, usell: verbal  suG  -
                   gostion alone; fascination plus verbal suggestion; and rmrco-
                   li-ypnoois.
                              a.  Verbal Su@r@cstioii
                                   'bility of a oubjec-2L -4-oluntarily to coiicfntrate his
                              I'he a
                         attentlo.n--or, alternativ-ely., of an operator to create a
                         situation  in which  the subject concentrates ulthout-necestiarily
                         understanding the   trqe  purpope--is  the   determining   factor
                         in the induction   of  hypn2osis.  The  prime  requisite  iF;  the
                         need of gaining a subject's    attention so that blis thou,,;lits
                         can be concentrated on one    idea or along one particular ch@Annel.
                              In verbal i3uggeation,   tho hypnotist prog3reiDses tl-lrou_qli
                         a series of tea2ts  wliicli  use  such  elcinentnry  psychologicnl
                         phenomena as  the  fact  -that,  with his eyes cloacd, a standii-Z
                         person  will  lose  his  balance  and fall  forvards  or   backvards
                                                                                                            r
                         if the  operator  can  peraujade  hi2m tbxougli suggestion tcf, ir-.agine
                         that he is  irecariously     balanced on a  plank  over  a  chasm,
                         in a ywring boat.,  or  Jixst  falling.  Rapidly  proceeding  frora
                         this dt-.Trons@kra-tion of his "powers", -the stage opc-rntor  will
                         then ask the subject to fix his attention on a real or
  6                       imngrinar,,f spot on the wall'or ceiling and l@n@.ep his eyes open
                         vliile he listens to wlist the bypnotist GAYS.  This will iavolic
                         ougZcGtions In a monotonous, rliytlmic litany that the nubll--ctla
   (,New

                                                                                                           ---------- -----
                             eyes are watering, his'lid"f gro-wing licnvy.. his I)ocly rclnxing,
                             drowaines3 in crec,,)InLT o'@vr lilti. Very t3o,,)tl--iii ii rtnt-ter
              2               of minutes usually, of secoiids on occngion--tlic subject will
                             enter a "trnnce' -- a at--ite which looks like sleep but
                             luring wliicli in fnot he is acutely responsive to the-V
                             ol)cr,,vtor'LL@-@-oiep- and ouggestionn.
             2                      b,  Fnqcinntiori. plus Verbal Sug-,Ec.,;tion
                                   The v@',11-knovu  crystal-ball technique      is an     example.,
                             altbouuh  any  point  of  concentration   will   do   as   irell:   the
                                                     %
                             tip of an operatc)r    j3 finger   a f2lnsbligli4t-1, any rliitiy objcct
                             which concen-trek-tee the raya    from a litjit source.  Tllc pur,-,)oE3e
                             of the device is so to tire       the optic nerve by intense starirlg
                             that the subject's uaturnl reaction will be drowsily to
                             close his eyes.  This urun2lly occurs in from 30 aeconds             to
                             Aevernl minutes.  'niE,.dr-.vice of fascinntion is       accorTI)allicd
 -e,.,                       by monotone verbal suggestions by the hypnotist            as described
                             above.                                                                                 2   r
                                   Co      co-Mriosia
                                   Barbiturates,  acting   as   cortical   cl--pressants,   can   be
                             used  to produce hyjnotic sleep       even If  all   other    mctlvda
                             fail.   Clilorofom,  and  atlier  were  the   first   narccrtics   used
   @T                        for this purpose2.  ITow various derivatives snd iiodific.,.ition3
                             of  the  plienobarbi-tal  f;3,mily  are  ured.  Sodium  nmytal   on(I
                             soditun
                                     peii-tQ'Iiol  are  tlil-  adot  commonly  used  brief-,Icting
                             barbiturates,    though  ot3liers   of   quite   different   deri,@mtion
                             show great promise a'nd may be more adaptable to clandestine ure.
                                                                                                                  7,

                                                                                                        ...... . ..... .
                                  Ttic consilltant referrk  to  atiovo.,  'W)io  lirii3  pfirticiratcd
                            in Agency operntions as       n rtici-ilirr of an   Artichoke   team,,   fecla
                            that nnrco-hypnosis no he knows it         is  not  as  effective  as   :Lt
                            might  nppear  at  first   glance   to   be.  Ile  feels  that   the   atupor
                            tbicli  ensues  doe3  not  in   every   case permit as deep a'-s'klnge
                            of  hypnosi-*, Is very difficult to control ana,, furtlic-@r,,
                            certai4 post-hypnotic phenomena,, of great vnluc in clan-
                            destine   wortfo may@be lacking,          On the other hand,, he agrees
                            that drug-assisted b)Tnosis is eseential In CIA vorlt.
                            3.  Awakening
                            Tlicre is no recorded     instance   in which   a    hy2pnotized    subjcct
                      has    failed to awaken.  Not one subject in a        hundred will "sleep
                      beyond    the hypnotist's ouggestionj, "In a moment I am going to
                      awaken  you.  Yoii  will  feel  fine,  happy   nnd   clict,--ful.   There   vill
                      be no ill effocta--no headache, drawainens, stiffuess or o-ther
2                      tliacomfort.  I am going to count to three, and at the count of
                      three I vill snap ml fingers and you will be complctel7 awake.
                      One--you   are   sleoping   much   more   lightly.   Two--almost   awake    now.
                      Three--('snapt)--you are wide awake!'
                            If for any reason a subject 2does not desire to aimkcn
 Ali
                      (usually conncc-ted vitli a-@Ish to continiie the pleasure and            cof.-.fcrt
                      of    release from anyic-ty and wor3.7 which accoripaiiirs li)-Inoois,
                      apparcixtly)j tliorc are several other tccl)niqiies to be tried.
                                                    !;id  some  other  psychiatrists   do   not   agree,,
                                                                                                      -d
                 at   least  inoofar  as  the   therapeutic   use   of   mrco-hyl)noi;la   Is   concc=c

               Should sll fail, cnr-,. unkct3 the *bjcct comfortable nrul leaves
                                         ranco will of itself clian(;e to liaturcil
               him alone.  The byi)iiotic t
                sleep and the subject will awukcn in auythirig from a fcv ulinutco
                to a couple of hours at th2e most.  But failure to awaken at the
                                          ifi quite extreordinnri.
                first'suggestion to do GP
                     4.  r-ont-I no-tic
                     Let us.auppose that a good h-ypno-tic subject has entcrc
                                         not3is. If the  operator  thea suggests..
                the deepest oU db of  h-yp
                 ")Ster I a-smken you you i(ill have no recollection  of vtmt h.SI3
                 occurred.  Furthermore, cxactly I-'. tiour after -you are n@mkencd
                 you will Go to the nenrest telephone and dial (any number).  To
                 wbom6ver answers you wil.1 say (any message)  in all likel-iliood
2                 the subject will do just that; andi-extraordinaril,
                                                                    enousli within
                    :Lnute or t-,io'of 1 liour.  This is a pott-liypnotic dugzestion.
                 a m
                 If the sub3ect after- avnkening rc!mc.,i,-iberp. or is tc,!2"k thfit he Liss
                  been given a post-bypnotic suggestion, wlint it is,, and wlien it
                  vill become operative,, he still will eyperience the greatest
                  difficulty in rfainting it.  Almost -Uie only vuy in vliiah he can
                  obtaia release from an almost intolerable feeling of discomfoi-t
                  is to carry out the pos't-hypliotic ougecstion as given him; or,
                  alterrintively, linve the suggestion rerioved under IT@-pnosis.. Fo.-
                  vl)at has been crcntcd is vcry similar to, if not lac,liticnl u-itli
                   a corlrpulsion nciu-osis.

                                                 ?I an exce
                      During a d(,Tnoiii3trntion wit       llcnt subject who is
                    awtaff emplayce of,Ag,3ncy,, the o@,crator au(,,Zcetcd, "Any time
                    that anyone asks you any question the answer to which would
                    involve a breach of security, you will imodint2ely fall into
                    a deep coma."  After tlifi subjcqt was u-@rakened, I ber6nn to*
                    estion him aaut his background, education, where ba wns
                    employed., "at. his dutlem were ("clerical"), I f ImUy nakcdr
                    'What is the combination of your office safe?"  The oubjeat's
                    e  a rolled up., 1-do head fell forward and he entered a dee--p
                    ye
                    hypnotic sleep.  Ilaturnlly, other reactioa3 than coma could
                    ha%,-e been oubstitutedo or any other "trigger" estiblished tl-an
                    that of a security question,,
                       The application  of var-inticus of this phenomenon to the
  2                  work of the clxuadeatine cervices is obviotis.  Fracticallif any
                    effect which cnn be devcloped in the deepest hypnotic stote c3n
                    also be obtained as a poi3-t-h7pnotic suggestion.  Post-li@-pnotic
                    suggentions,raiterstld during sov-,r33L ses2sions of hnnosis hav-e
                    been kncwn to 4c@dure for years.  The image that comes to mind
                    is of ablnckboard an which a meanage vil.1 endure until crazed
                    qr blurred.by- time.
                            Ai, RcF;reasion
                        On@o of the roat remarkable plienometia of h@6-pi-iotioii' is tlip
                    abili-ty of an operator to relzress the time t3ene'c oE a dccnly
                    hypnot:lzcd oubjoct.  The recollection of circw-,iotniicc.,; wliicli
   VOW

                                                10
                     liav-c'been coinpletely lost to ordir-L--iry mcrr@o@-y, nnd wliich are  iiot
                     recoverable in the nor@ntil state a:C iidnd, bcQomcf3 possible.
                          For example, the-writer bas regressed an Agency employee
                     to tlr2. nge of 10,.Gsked her to describe hcr day'a doings,
                     friends,, hoiiie, etc.  Sli6 answered in a cliild'E; voice and @ntorrition.
                                      ith a pencil and puper and asked to v4te her
                     When presented v
                     nauk.--., slip- wrate..,@n the awkwa2rd sprawl of a child.  UI)ON being
                     awakened,, she had no recollection of what liad gono on., could
                     not recember the names of-her   seliool cliiims (but aquealed in
                     delighted recognition when the names E;Ic licr3e]-f hn(I rcelccl   off
                     fivx3 minutes before were read back to her).  To all intentr.     ni-ul
                     purposes, she had once agnin been 10 years old.
                          The implications of age regression for covrrt operations rny
                     be obvious., especin3.ly in the interrogation of auspec".-ed double-
                     agents.  A skilled operator with a good subject can not only 'Lind
                     out comp2lately'about a  subjeat's  pastj  be  can  cause  the  oubject
                                                        -ng, briefing, etc.  Perliaps less
                     to re-enact a recruitment, traini
                     obvious is the  possibility of using regression to build a ne-v
  Z,                 identity, and  in  some  degree.,a  clmnfed  pcroonality.  The  almost
              2       Uhbelievable recall of detail uni3cr li-ypno:3io to an iiid.iv-idunl-
                     wlioaa conscious mind does riot "r(-,t-,ictaber" r,,,alco feasiblr@.t a fnr
                     rielicr hnrvcst o-C inteuigence even from agcnts wtio lieive  "givei-i
                     their 3all".  Furthcxmiore, a hypnotizc(l pLrFion can be rcgrei3o(-,d (i3ny)
                     to a time wlien tic saw n I)ieco of QquipinenL, a factoi-i,  an  cvcnt

                   and lie can be caiised to draw what lie saw.  'i4-lieth@,r ho underotood
                   its significnnce or not, he will r;@producc,,occurately wliat lie
                   vitneased; though, of course,, unless he is an arti3t, he V-111
                   not   caent the operator with a creative masterpiece.
                     2    If hypnotism can b6 used in covert operationz at al2@   ege
                   regression m3y@@be the bypno'@lic plienomcnon of grc,-itcrt 1--otential
                   vulue.
                   D.  Other Frtctors
                         1. Wbat Malzes n Good Sub@eqt?
                         Ito one appears to knav.  The insan2e, tllc igi-iorant or stupill,
                   the brilliant and erratic neurotic--theae   are uoually regardcd as
                   P(or  subjects.  Other than the apparent correlation between vaking
                   suggestibility, and hypnotic susceptibility,, Little semna to be kmown.
                         2.  1,TliF3t ClarELctr--rizcs a Cood Operator?
                         Although nlrost an)-onn can be ' ught to lwnotize) the   idcal
                   characteristics are:
                              (a)  In age,, 35 or older.
                              (b)  netilth-y in a raaiant,, vital way.
                              (c)  Dignificd (prcatiae  is important) with a Food -v-oice.
  2                            (d)  Personal oppeal of a kincl that inspires ndmiration
                         rather than warm lil,.ing.
                              (e)  impenetrable res@rvL-.
                              (f)  Cnlnmfsn under pressure.
                                                         -confidcrice.
                        0           A IiiFli degre(- of self
                              (h)  A phyrically  large man., of impressive carriage., may
                         make a bctter operator than a s=3.1 one,, other thingo beiii,,v ea.,-ial.

                                                                                                       - ------ -----------
                                                   12
                              Stoars of liilno-,ti.ja
                          'A mmbcr of different clnosiflctitir-no nre in  i,lr;c.  Sorri-,
                    lnborntor,.r nnd mcdical workers r(.@coGnize up,to 50 different
                                                                                                              F-
                    degroes, depending an responses.  Itiost sta&-c.- operntors uce
                    five-% For practical urAer;;tonding, t.@ie follovj-ng tILrc-.,c  E23@cm
                    adequatei
                               (a)   Lc'%.Mrgy--a lack or ficial extresaion, Vcrfec@@,
                          passivity...'a'yeUdq  beav7  or  quivexlxg.  Tho   aubject   cat
                          opc-@a his eyes lf cballeneed, but often failn to do no,
      2                    saying that he prefera the ctrto,-t o-f'keeping them closed.
                          'ibe mind in alert and the mc-@ory almrp.  Tnc breath:Lng in
                          Zike,that of normal slecp,,  The subject will      often cor--nent
                          on his pleasant r-,l@2nxed feelinC3.  Ec i.,3 nlert and cible to
                          renist aiigz-cutimo.
                               Almo,-,t every cojpcrnting subject can be broti@,lit to tldo
                          a'-age.
                                (b)  cata3.epay--erLcomposses all of the eheractcristics
     2                     of lethargy,  but is a deeper stage.  The subject cam-mot open
                          Ids" eyes.  The eyeballz my turn upwards.  I.-LI@ eyelids do
                          not quiv-cr.  T'iio 3du-,ba feel honvy.  His breatliing is slc-.tcr and
                          deeper@  TAI)cre ic inr,@,naitivity to2 -priln and @umicculnr rigi(liL,/
                          if tliii3 is su.Urrouted.  tlotor v@ctivity is iwiibitcl.  1-." tL-c-
                          sixbjnct's arm or leg is pl-aced i-,i n cortaiii pouttion atul
                          i;uef,-@.ations Given tl1z-111- b@-- car)ro-t move the  it W-13-1 rcl-.iin

                                                    i,igirlity until the gsugFlcGtions
                       stntionary or il A 3tste,  7
                                                       tllc! frlbject 1-na a bn7.y'
                       nre removed.  Af ter nwnlccniii(T,
                       recollection (as in a2 arcom) of some of the '4,liings that
                       wexe
                            said or done,, but cannot remember clearly.
                            A cooperating  subject vlio reaches the letliargic state
                       on a first trial can usually br-1, taugli-L 1;o ciit6er the @ntnlcptic
                       stage In  2later session5.
                                  pomnamb4ism.  This is the deepest state     of bLypuo3is
                        and exhibits all  of the'aharacteristic3 of the catolcp-"Vic
                        cture.  There is  extt@aordiriqry iTx--obility.  The subject irill
 2                       not move his limbs  or cl=ge- 1-da position of his o,.;n violition.
                       .He can perform acts suggested to him arid anerter quentions
                        without avvlkening.  'w'hen he does awake,, bowevcr,, he has no
                        recouaction of vhat occurred.  ]le ctin be made to opo-n his
                         eyes  walk about,, and exhibit evr-ry      oLo bein4g a-,;.nl:c. In
                         this stntep it is possible -to prod-,ice -Ai3unl hallucin3ticuo as
                         vell as auditory., gustatory and olfactory, onco.  Taere   is
                         a'  at 2conplete insensitivity to pain if anesthesia in
                         attgge3ted; an occasion, surgical opl-ratiorw have been  PcTfOrm,--d
                          without CiGn of distr(,os by -the patie&,. in this Gtate Of
                          h@rpnaais.  @lany if not all of the pliono-,nciia ascocia'cd lth
       2                   Indian YE -a (lerivu- from self -li@-pnotisr-i to thi:3 stage b-j
                               It  is the Gomnauil)ulistic stag(% that the labomtory figure
                          of 1  success out of 5 in the adult riibjcctz refcro; f',artherrcrc,,

                          1 out of 5 reaches this stage on the  first induction.
                          With trainingp a fair percentage of all willing subjects
                          any be tnught to do Go.
                              VattZ7ally tbore are exceptioiis and unuaua
                                                                           c a  a
                          such as viien a atib2@act in the "lethargic" stage irill
                          exhibit some behhvior of the "somnambulistic"   stage, or
                          vurious other combinations of  hypnotic  responses  which
                          do not entirely fit tho'cl@6r.Gificatio-,in an V,,Iven.
                          4,  1ILnws o:C Ilypi-iotis,-n"
       2                   In considering the use of hypnosis as  an oi>eri3tior@al tool.,
                      one should bear in mind that the laboratory or stage  teclmiqucs
                      described above exist in tlicir prosent versions because thcrc
                      was nei@d for them in those forms.  In o-ther uords,, they have no
                 2     necessary standing apart from the context in which they were
                      developed.  They may or mny not be suitable for clsndeatine
                      purposes. On-ibe other  band,  there-is  considerable  reason to
                                                                                                       7
                      believe that arlalegaua techniquea could be worked out for  clan-
               2       destine-use wliich would achieve the same results In co,-rple'tely
                      different 'ways. The experienced inform-Nnt inentioned  above given
                      the foalowing "Uwa"  or bnsiq rcqiiireilip-nta In a,.IFApting a rictliod
                      of induction:
                                (a)  The operator must give. th0n impression of nl)colute
                           confidence in his awn ability.

                               (b)  'llic pro       @iould be progressive  in
                                            cedure
                          psycliolof,-ical intensity.  In otlicr zords, the metliod
                          of induction must proceed from simple    reactioiis coi,=on
                          to nearly all mankind.. through more   complex one2, to
               2                                                                 T,
                          the-point where the subject finally    enters  one  of the
                                                                                k
                          dcgrees @f tranee.
                               i(c)  @rimtever-the procedure,, the conditions  and
                          oral suggestiong (which need  not,2  of  course,  ev-er
                          mention   the word ")VpnoGis')  must  be  presented  to tl;c
                          subject in  a manner and fol-in which  are  ncccptnble and
                          logical to  him.
                          5. Can a Subject  be  lIZEnotized  Agninat  His  Will?
   4                      Excepting tho use of drugs, the answer must be "no2" if
                                                       (4)
                     he widerstands whnt is going on.       Eowever, if the qucation
                     can be rewritten to rea(l,, "Can a subject be hypnotized witliout
                     his knowledge?" the answer appears to be "yes' under favorable
                     circumstances:  disguised  induction  and  a  good  subject.
                          Co2nnected-with this questiorx is wliether a li@rpnotizcd subzec-t
                     will do any-thing to viollil.c bin moral codc..  Can a person under
                     ,deep hypnosis I)c made to vi'olate a security ontli or commit riurcli'll
                     or  atenl?   There is mucli dicar,@.recrr@eiit over tlte nn!3irers to th@,se
                     questions.  The usual nnower @s tl)at he will iic@., utiless lie
                     unconscioiialy" wnnts to bresk security, comnit niurder, atcal, etc.
                    See, liowever., "instantanooias" hypnooiii belo-j.

                         But aiil.Tose that vliil--- under lf,,,,pnosis a subject is told thnt
                             -ed one's life to in danger from a inaiiine alid thnt  the
                         n IoN
                         only means a rescue is to alio-ot a persondezigmted as the
                         manlac?  Three expert 2practitioners (two from uru"rcities and
                         the Agency coiisultant 4iioted above) say that there in na datib@4..
                         on the 'Sasis pS tlielr eyperience thatta auch  circutpstnnc\,s
                         murdfr would be a@tempted.  'Me only requirement is that the
                            2     be'piii' "in a-:rorm omA mnner acccptable  to the rubjlct."
                         proposal
                         Most modern authorities feel that a sub4cat v.13.1  carry out any
                         SuEzestiati which lie can rationa3-ize within the fmricworl,. of
                         his moral code.
           2                  (Currently., -Uicre in a murder trial                wtiicli the  ILI
                                                                     L
                         murderer has been judged to have been under hypnosis at the     time
                         of the crime.  Ee has been retried, relcaactl and the hypnotist
                         tried and convicted.  "Lhe case Is no-w under ap-pcal.  The conicnt2
                         of the three knowledg^-able informanto -w-ns ttiat the I-,ypnotist must
                         have been a rank amateur to.have been  f<)und  out  since  any
                         experie=cd op-erator would have known how to sugge.-,,L'  nimy ilic
                         fact that be had arranged  the  crime.)
                  II.  2  APPLICATIM OF I-,Trl.70313 I.-LO COVL,RD OPY-MATIONS
                                            -d pre-t,-sting and indiaction are ncccssitica
                         Obviously, diaguisc
                   for   the use of hypnosis In clondestine opc-rn-liori,,io  Witlioiit at lens-'u
                    the  of;,cond of tlicf3c I sm urtible to i3ec that nrq co-,rert liypnotic i,,@ciiiiiq@ic

                is feasible.     With tliesc, a numeor of offensive  and defensive
                usea are immediately appnrent nnd otliers @roul(I iin(3oubtcdly euggcat
                tbemselven in field operaticna.
                    A.  DiaM!ii;cd Pre-Teati
                                                                            2 u
                    Ti-ie"prc-testp' of courgo-, is for suggestibility.  I cn  r-onceive
                of n. ver-                                       tccliniclues vrli'lcli
                        ,f clever c$i(,rntor's working out verbal
                would Induce ulconscious reaqtions in a possible subject; but this
                would require enormous e4erience and a really impressive degree
                of skil3..  While this approach cliou3-d not be ignored, it woul(I be
                a frail foundatioii on wlaieli to erect a PrOFrnm.
                     Rovever, any situntion  in which  any- kind of intelligerice or
                psy2chol6'gical test is given can be co=crted rather easily,, witlicut
                the aubject's knovlefJ(,,e, to a test of suggestibility as well.  For
                example, the Borslzch Test   (irilc-blota) and the TI-icmatic Arperccl)tion
                Test (TAT) bo-aitray lend thcmaelves to dis,-uist--tl Traso pr2e*f--oting, I
                am Liforwed.  Or perhaps the addition of yet anotlier qucstionnnire
                to those given either in-coming staff emploices or to refugees cczing-
                into the West could-do the job.
                     B.  D%         Induction
                      To achieve hyprosis,, tlin- subject must be coaxed,frightened,2 or
                druggc-d into a trance.  Dieguisc-d tL3Bilniques m-@y I)c bascd iipon
                 situations riich as tl)e following:
                     I include the use of drugs, Fnses, nerocolo, etc. in disgulactl
                 in(luction tecliniques.
                                         6                  7 --o

                           1. A @letlicnl  Fxnni-nntio'@
                           Under the  giiiae  of  takin- n blood pronstire-rendine,) the
                     subject mny be coaxed in'to relnnation.  Or a blood tea%'. my
                     be  used to administer a drug.     Or an eye examinatioa to cnuoo
                   2  thc--,subject to follow the movements of a ti7ay liglit or    'o s'Gare
                     into a  flarshlight vblle verbal sueuatio-na are glveii.
                                   "lygrnpll RL,.n
                           2.  A P6
                           I am-'tolo,-..thatadisguised induction based upon an a2daption
                      o-f the normal polygraph procedure would not only be idieal
                     :(because any ciiriounity-'would bg, ooaked up by interest in the
                        lygmph itself)t but     has been' oucceogfully tested in a lirdtcd
                      PO
                                Electro-enceEtiOlbry
           2                                         ,raph Tcst
                           Similar to polygraph    run*  The rubject would logicnll@e
                      accept suggeationo to relax and fouow 'Ulir-, oper@ntor's @,ortl3.
                                                      Tczt
                                                       etc.
                            5*  Vitamin InJecti2ona,
                            There arct@also at least tvo methods of "in-stantane u;i induction"
                       vhichlare c=ied out so quickly that they may be used.. if one in
                       quite oure of a oubject's ounceptibilityo      on the statiatically
                       good assuniption that the memory o-'L' uliit 1"-I)pe4ned caii be su:Lfcote(I
                       ovny during the trance which ensues.  Both methcds require        c:cpcrt
                       operators,, liowevrr,, i3inco o,-ic could c,-tuce     rind the

                                             19
                     requires; vust expfricnee, abe lutc nosurnncc, nii(I a Iiip@i (1(-pXce
                     of muoculnr coartlitintion.
                     C.  Spccific Op,@,rntioml S 1 til n t -1. c).-i s
                         1.  There is a very mml possibility  that h2ypnosis coulfl
                     he34@ iis gain a detailed luiowlcdge of ho-,r the opposition,.Is
                     liandling both their own agento and those of oi.Lr people @110
                     have been captured and "brain-w-,isl)cd".  For n hypnot4t-.c-fl person
                     can recall peA@ events v-lth as2tonishing clarity and detail,,
                     in many cases when he does not realize with his conscious mind
                     that he "reinembera
                         Consequrntly, liypnotio t,--clmiques sl>o-Lild be most uoeful
                     in:interrogationa, whether friendly or hostile,, w-itli or vithzut
                     drugs, assuming that a good subject is being q2uestioned.
                         "Brain-vnohed" people, we should underntand, may not recall
                     consciously evex-ftliing that happened to tlicm.  Under liypnc-,in,
                     there is a strong probability that they will do so, particularly
                     'if age regression is _Dossible.  Furthermore,, if hvpuotic tec2hniquc3
                     were used on t@L-m by the opposition to "brain-T.-ash' and "brain-
                     chaiige" them,, tILin fact msy be learned under hypnosis and a
                     re-conversion achieved through suggestion'.
                          I do not feel that it is completely outside the boundo'of
                     reality that we miglit I)1c able to achieve the "convcrsion" of -a
                     prominent Western coipxuait3t If we could lifive nccef;s to one ,41 io
                     @mF3 ILigiLly siigjcatiblep if we had sufficic-,i't. tiite.  'Llits subject

                      requires cperntional erperime&ation.  TI)e j,,oseibilities are
                      not only interesting, they   are  frirlitcning.  A  kiiid   of'double-
                      think Orvellian world of hypnosis,, while tinli-l,.ely., is iio4ll-
                      utterly faatactic.  One tliing is cleari  'we really do not
                                                                    -onged by liypli&sis.
                      kno,@ within ttbat limits "belief" my be cl
                           Based cri.,wlint I Im-,re read, I judge that tho'
                             @@se an elaborate       conditioned-reflex procciure in
                      their "br@iii.Lv2':'3'!3hing"',  Evea so,, lripnosis rmy be able On the
                      one hand  to pre-condition   a subject against the pressures
                      or after  the fact to licip  undo the deTr@ne,,e.
                             Ar)nlaLrus Case -Li
                                 One of the foreinost U.S. laboratory experirii,-nters
        2                     with hypnosis on one occasion (1939) "converted" a
                             campus atheist to a devout believer.  The narie orcrator
                             vna on the point of trying a nimilnr experiment in
                             reverse with a divinity student wlicn tbo iinivernity
                             authorities forbade further teet3.  Defore tl-ic "convcraion'
                             to religion throiigli h@-pitosia hn(I I)ccn crascrl by nefntive
                                  s-tionn, the subject lin(I for over two weeks -ivcl-i
                             every sigii of being a dedicated religious convert.  He
                             was restored  to  his  former  disbelief.  I  know2  of  no  wny
                             of estimating how long the h-ypnoticnlly-imposed orientntion
                             vould have endured;  but  once  implanted.  of  coilrse,,  cir-
                               ,stanceo  tended  to  reinforce  it.  Given  a  subject   who
                             cun
                             could be,converted at all,, the now orienta2tion mig)2t beco:mc
                             permanent,, the experimenter felt.
                             2. t, As part of their indoctrina-tion:procedure, CIA staff
                       peri&onrv--l mloit be tested for hypnotic s);,3cc-.ptibility.  Acti:ally,
                       it appeara to  be  easier  to  lrjpnotizc  larcc  numbers  of  people
                       thtnn a ain(7,le subject, for the bco-L oul)jcc-tg F@o "under" quickly

                      tlnd help to conditi-on otli.era @n Llic nudience who mlnit not,
                      an sirlgle subjects, havo been su3ccptible @,o          the techniqiie
                      beirw, used.
                             Conditioning against. -brain-wusr,.4.@"       la only ona we2 of
                       hypqosio on staff permo-nnel.  tlorale        and  security purpoGc3
                       might be served as well.  It would certainly be of c
                       abl e vulue to:'tlie Ap,,ency to lu@ow wlilch of its parGoTuVI wro
                          highly               in any c-nue; for tl-.ese vulnerable      peol)le
                       could be quite     easil@ protected by a pout-hypnotic suggc'i3tion
                       such as the following: ..";-f orrjronc attempts to liypaoti--e ),au,,
                       to put you under presioure of any         ItinLI to E,,iva up :3ecurity dn-Ln,
                      2  convert you to co=n:lsm., or otherrit3a         attempt   to   persuntle   ycu
                        to go against yo= seculrity oath,, you,wiu irmwdintel@y fall
                        into deep coma,, and contiime to do so ogain and agnin as long
                        as the pressuro la mintaincd;" or, '-fc= will to resirt -@rill
                        becolic Greater Liml greater;" etc.
                               While tlicse post-linnotic suggestions could pxvoabl.@r be
                         "broken" if enoug@i time were takenp tbvre is an excellent ch=ce
                        that   the subjdct 6,,cxLld be considered too difficult.
             2                  Am]-opous Cnse_p_
                                     Durinr, World 1.4ar II,    otngo  li7pnotists   @rere   cmploy@.d
                               to entortain troops.  As onr-, part oA' the proce@--aings,
                               aiidience Ily-plao3in NMO used nad up      to f3 Oll't of 3.0 person:-,
                               ware succoesAu-11@r pul', to  r3lo-,P-p'.  DLi,-:Ing this proccdLi-re,,
                               mornl.e our,,           w(!re  gi-,ren  ver-I   succ(,Srfully.   tftcr-
               7                             ,?c3tiono
                               effects wcre noticcnble montlis la*%.cr, in        rany cases.

                                                               covr-r-stories wlitle iirdcr
                                    Agents rilglit I)c giv
                         hypnosis and not on-ly learn tlicii faul.tlcgaly,
                                                                                 btil belie,,rc.,
                         them.   Every dctall coul2(I be m-atlc to sink in.         rilic conviction
                         alnd  a-pparent  sincerity  with  which   an   individual   will   defend
                         a fol3e identity giveq  afj  a  post-bjl)iaotic  c;tit,@gestion  la,  nb-,ost
                         unbelievable.- One's      tnc--mory for Lletoil under such  co,--,rli'tion3
                         appears tQ be boundless.
                               Analog0vt Cone
                                     A CIA  Security    Office  eliployc(*  wns  liypnotitel   nnl
                               gven  a  false   iderwity.   Sjie   defendctl   it   hotly,   Conying
                 2              lier triic rnrin- v@il rntionnlizing witli conviction the.
                               poesession  of  identity  carda  mnde  out  to   her   resal   rej-f.
                                         iving lind the false iacntity crneed by
                               Later, IL
                               she ;;i!@s nslced if she lind ever  heard  of  the  mr,.c  rhe  lin(I
                               been defendiag as her ovu five minutes before.  SLc thougbtj
                               shoolt  her  head  and  Gaid,  "rmtlz  a  poeudo  if   I   ever   henrd
                               one."  Aprarently  alie  had  a  true  omn^-sia  for   t'he   cnt:Lre
                               episode.
                                    IT5rpno@@it; would p@!rmit  tlio  rccr-uitrebt  and  banalinr5  of
                         hi F
                            @i-level  pol.Lticnl  setlon  ni3c-iits,  In   particular,   under   ideal
                         -coatrol.   Convictious   2could   be    reinforced,    political    courses
                         suggested, appointments irifluenced--w-itli a really good siibjcct.,
                         only  the  imgination   and   skiu   of   the   lmndling   operator   and tiae
                         inherent  limitations  of  b@rpnosis  as   a   techniq.uc   would   limit -thc!
       2                   ossibilities.
                                    Doublc-a[mnt3 could both be digeoverecl unLI u,,je@-I iiitll
                         riucli hlejicr  deace  of  nse-Liruti@e  if  hyptiotic   control   sufricic-ut
   4v
                         to pentit rcf,,r(,scion i-rere o-
          1                                                .periitive.  Thcy coul.d be gi,,ren
 t
     L

                                                 P-21
                     fsug
                        gc-stions wlilch  would have t(, cforce of true  compulsions to
                     tell of npproictie@s rnde, tjirgetr,, I)ricf ljig, true irleiitity,
                     etc.. There  is  alzo  the possibility thnt such persons could
                     be used  uddcr  a  coulrol much 6tronger that any ve noi7 pon3cso.
                         Exarples of this kind could be continuod ralmor@t J@ndc'cinitcly.
                 The sine qua non is   hypnotic control.  Ilypnoals for clnrulqatine
                 opemtions badi@.n2q*la disguised pre-tests and disguised induction
                 methods.  These require operettionally-*riented resunrcli.
                     The difficulty with hypnotic renearcli done in cie(lical, I-nbor,-itory
                 or stage eciatexts is that techniques and results valid priLmrily for
                 therapy or entertainm2ent are obtaincd.  O=e acnin we are facc
                 the fnmiliar problom of marrying a oesnz develored for otber I)urporcs
                                                                   r;ccips cl(-er tl-Lit the
                 to the retiitcments of covert@. opcraticns.  It
                 only way in vhicti we can make bypnosis into an effecti-ic clnndeatine
                 vespon--nssiiming that this Is pc@osible--will be by testing and ei:i;eri-
                 menting under ficld'conditionb.
                      First, I can cee no application-of hypnooi3 to covert cpcratiouo
                 unless roasombly2 effective tceliiiqucs of disgi,ii.,3cd induction can be
                 workcd out.  The usunl lnductioi tectiniquen rcqiiire villing, even     enger
                 complinnce by the nubject.  Tle requ:LrLtncnt io fo-r a VI-iriety of  tccl;tii(lucs
                 built nrciiii(.1 fam3iliar ntcnt rrscruitme:.nt L;itiintl@rjii:,oucli EtG air.,dJ.c,-.%].
                 exa-minatiov-n, security procedures,                                       ctc.

                                                                                           . ... .. ... ....
                                                    2y
                 Fncli technique before being acccptit)lr! must       n stra-,iF, ner,,,xronce
                 firr.1%. of inducinc, li)-pnoGin, nn(l receii,l of kc.,cpinp, tkic sub@ect
                 unnwure of wlint wus being attempted whetber the    at-teu-,pt fails or
                 succeeds.
                        Nhe
                      so     pritrzry research requirctiient is for (licgiiised inituc 1-ion
                 rii-- tli'ods . of    nature, with or witliotit di-urs.  @Jith c2N-@n a
                 fev of these ugan  idiich ve could rely, I cnn ace that liy-piiosis
                                    "tent pdrt ia certain key operations.
                 could play an impor
                      TI-ie nakt reqiiirenent In 4rder of imrortance appmrs to        to
                 be the working out of effcctiva dis  ised -.-I)x2-e-tests for sugceptibility.
                 The purpose of there voulrl be to enable us to select or relcct
                 subjects vith assurance.  Howeverip this is a desirnble requircuient but
                 not a crucial one if v-e nre Iiighly uiiccc:3Gful with dii3LTtiiacd induction.
                 For if ve bave effectivf2-- dislntir.,od induction we can nf'foxd to x"aik
                 the risk of,atteirpting to :Lntluce li)Tnonia in br-d sub@ectr,--aa lcq-ilr, ns
                 the subject vill not rcoogriize what was attcmpted.
                      Cer+.ainly a prime requ-Lroment is for us to knov wh2at are tli:@
                 inherent limitaticais of bypnosis as a control uieang.  Low fnr is      it
                 possible to go in implanting ideas or ctimuli to action?  13@pyotul     viiat
                 point does rebellion set in7  To vlint extent     can we trust liypnokic
                 oullgestions to  I)rodiice Eii@ncsia?  An@l a hoc;t of rcl.Atrd quci3tions..
                       Frnrdcly, I cni-i sce no way of,cl)tniniruy nnrweri; -,iliieh we c;in
                 trust rl-,ort of tryinf.-, our luiowlctlrrc iii ti-uc@ oF,@!i,atictinl oltuatiolls.
 7                For ia the laborntory, or with ccnl)lctely             and idtting 67;bjccts,
   took,

                                                 2]i
             how can ve be certnin thst vnlid    r  iil-t-a are beinri (,-otten?  r..o L tr
                                                                                       na
              what conciiisions are r@racl)cd Ja 3ituntloi)t3 ot,'Iicr t.l:;in triil,2,
                       =St gtjll al)ply' tII030 conclusions to   knov vbat w@c kllcv-
              ones  ve.
              ficadqwrters and laboratory research can malse a    start,, but the only
                                                                  "r-L operfLLic;ns w-ill
             2 convi=ins test or tiic utiuty of hypnosis in co
              be the prng7,ztic oil,-t.
                    ThL-no assiming that -,m- have bad scr,.)e degree of isiicccoei with
              tbnee categories   of resenz@chj, we obviously must devote serious efforts
               to wqri out'.counter-mcasuren,,,both to protect ourselvco and    to
               anticipate wlicit tl-,e oppoo-I ticn cay to frusl-rate oiir efforta.  It
               should be reca3.lc-d tl,,at the Fusr;iane at least i3ince I'avlo-v have devoted
               large resources to work in related fields of pi3yehology.  If2 bypuoi3is
               renll7 bas a potential, we may at thia non@ent be its victims.  Tlio
                defcnei-@-e aspect, -while not eml)bnoized In thiz p.,3per  in sn i7r,-,=tant
                one.
                     Finally, I think a few words u-,unt be said about using hyproi3ia
                as a cowrt tool Should fux-ther work prove it npplicable.  In a concrete
                VRY)  this is conneated  with rescarch, for reaenrch as I conceive it in
                this  context renni3 iraginatin-c end critical tel@ting ia field all".untions.
                 I doubt "riously wlic!tlicr any responzible case  officer or supcrviror
                 in the field would  be -,,ri3.-IAnG to cccpcrate in aii (D,,)c-rni,,Ion dc3iGncd
                 both to furtlier Iiin operational purposes and   to pi-oitdc factual field
                 research dc%ta ;Yitlicrit witncsaii-.ig a ;.Icno-nztrntioli of some of the th-in,7s
                 act forth in t'&iis                           ruU;,_@-,,ijticn, for      or
                                      -Z
                                                                                                       -9!- v

                                                                                                     2 t
                                  n kr,2 rc!@:,TcSGICn*            (For TxLt  mntterp                       ncalurc  that             tile    
rqnflers  of  tlil3
                                                                   eedingly  alteptical  Of  wl'at  iG,                             written    
ancl  n(31L
                                  paper  will  be  exc
                                                                                                                                ata  incliuc'tl
to  feel
                                                                                                                   YeA
                                              these  phenome@na  demonstrated.)
                                  to  see
                                  that  it As  cnly  when  case  officer3  work  togetlicr  w-itli  a  proficient
                                  h7pnotist  on            an  operation  tlmt  rcally  creative  and  origin,-il                              
f.ecl'rltques
   2                               vi3-l be  developed'-  if  at  all.
                                                                  l@@,t  of  the               roblem  of  operationnlly-ori-enting            
rezearch
                                          At  least a
                                  cn hypnosis,  then,  appears                            to be  an  organizational  cne.2                     
Of  th,@.-
                                  seve)ml wayi3  of  a-pprocichinid  solution,  the  mo3t  persuasivc  to  me
                                  derivrs from the fact tl,.at a Gcnior                                       r@eprcaeutativ-- or Li Stztloti
Chief
                            2      is ultimately responsible for operations under bis co=,and, and be
                                                 lp
                                  will be a key figure la determining vhether bypnotic techniques Go"-.
                                  a  fair        slmke or not.  14y distinct impreasion is that field co=arvier3
                                  either         will not perulit at all, or reluct2antly cooperate @ritli cri)cratioiL,3
                                  tlint involf-e              new, mynterlaue or (to -the u-ninitirtc(l) occult tecialiqucs.
                                  Grud&iag cooperalion comnunicates itself to the case officera and tbn
                                              e is half lost.
  2                                but.tl
                                              If by                                      tential lix covert operations (nad I feel that
                                                         prmala has a               po
                                    we muot pro-m tl-nt it                         has not, rather thcan th,-- reverse), I b2elieve
                                    that'tbe           good will nnd open-nitncled cooperatimi of field co=,,mrulcr3                           
is
                                    essential.  If tlic-y cnn be per.@itiaded initj.ally that 1-i)Tno,.4ir, Is                                 
a -icE2,@ns
                                    tbot is worth a cerious                                            nn(I after            it gct3 tl-j,.it
trinl If                      tlicy are
                                    persua(le(I tlint liy-j,nonig is useful, tllcn                                         it secui3 to me that
l9lcn(lqiinrters
                                    may be certain "-b-at c;iich la n fnet.

                    Wldle I would lm.,iv,-!nc tlint no'(1 iinicn votil.d ewr be tnkcn to
              use  hypnoois on any large ocnle,     it ze(,Inn to follo.4 from the rcnsoning
              abom that the most-practicexl)le vay     c)f liamllinlt vliat2cvcr work iG  dcnc
                  ld be'througli  ni3sigaing  trained  hypnotic  operators  to  PCS  duty  at
              vlou
               a very f4.,.? r,.njor field otaticno.  A totim of, i;ay, two operatorr@  t   a
               boac with  whatever linviot.'ic qualifications accmed lnrlicntc(t @2ra-Lild
               probably be a mini:i=,, assuming that the first -tt-,ste  of.  to4chniqi-,cs
               appear  promisiu&.enough  to  coutinize  at   all.   The   chain-of-command,
               then,  would be tl=mgh the     field  chiefs  back  to  the  area  divisions
                at nendqxmrter2a, Witli WI-otcvir functional starfs cc(-,u,4d  ren;;oiiobl.c
                on licadqiini-ters distribution for opcratiaml    proposnlj3,   rcports   and
                   suggestions.
                      If   this irznner of bandling rhould be acccl)ted, tlio need for
                   H2eadquarters research will be in the irdtial-working out of diSS-ai3ed
                pre-tests and  induction  "thoda,  in  the  otnnCLnrdizntion  of  wliatc,;-2r
                tecluiiquci3 are to be tcstbd nna r..odific@d in tl-,f,- fiel(l, in tlle P-rockire-
        2         meat-e-nd explmmtcry testiag of drugs whjch Eil-" promise of assisting
                 hypnosis.  But  I  am  strongly  persuaded  that  the  only  effective  ,@ay
                 of utilizing vliate,@rr potential hypnoris may hnve-in clnndcatine work
                 will be by   separating the operriti=al com7,nad responsibility and2 the
                   Read                                                           to  Mc   to
                      quarters research rc-,spo-o@sibility.  The foii-.icr nppt,-.arn
                 belong in operatioml cl)ntmela; vliil.e the latter, hcnrcvcr      it,-.portanl-.,
                  should not be  pem0itted  for  lack  of  dixect  opcrntio)inl,  orientntiozi
                  to delay or ai,ymiy field applicatiorli.
   LIZ,

                                                27
                             OF CO@"(,I;l I(,-7j
                    1.  The aura crf ci(le-uh" clinrlat@-inry wliiah envviop3 liypnoal.3
               should not blind us to the   realities of a re=nrkable PzYcholoGical
               ilid nore2nti.
                                           out of five adillts can                  tc
                    2.  I\n er.-timte(I One
                                                                       tion. J."Itll
               the deel>ezt atav-   romli.-imbults.-i, on tbe f irat ltiduc
               disguised pre--Ce2CLtal-AB aqelectias deviccj, a poseible or-a out   02
               t;im chocen subjecta may be   Put. into trt%nce.  Further, dioC;uit3c@d
                                                         mi3c to provide u3 eitlier
               Induction techniques, if    feadlible, pFo
                vtth unuittin[r, liypnotize-d subjc-,cto or, should an attctl)t fail, I.eave
                an iinwi@ting dud beliAnA.
                          If bypnotic control can be established over eny pnrticipant
                In a clamlestine operation, the operntor will apparently tive an
                extraotdimr-f de(,,rec of lnfliicncc, a control in order of
                beyond anything N-L,      ev-cr considered fcacible.
                      4.  Scoe of the Induction techniques oripinally devel@oped for
                               -tory, or medicine may be directly
                stage.9 labo=                                      adapt@Lblc for d2ircuirad
                use in  clngdestine  operatims; ltxro or tl-crce are nvuilnble for field
                 tests ricnr (pol:ygrnpli, =--dicnl exnmirmtion, clectro-encepbalograpli.,
                           Rc-af--cireli 1.13 @listifiell2 (a) to discovt-r tli(, irilicrt-.nt litlltaticnl;
                  of liypnozli3 an n covc-i.,t opc-,raiion tool, (b) t@.)    diofniiiell I)rc-
                  tests (e) to          (lieguisetl izirliiclion tocljnlqt.,(@s, nnc1l (,I) to
                  counter-rbenciuc!s.  In tl)c apicit)n o-.f the writ(.,r, ro rc,-i,--rircii al@ould
                  be authorited by CIA which is not cTamtioraUy-oricntc-d.  TLc moi3t

                                      23
                                     1  '411 renearch accurately sc-clin to
            practicable method of orient ngn
            in-mlm cirry-ing it <),it in the fielcl by P-pplyinl ciir c,,irrent
            led.Ge to actual operations.
                    A modest oprmtional program wiU I)e just2ificd if dirgliincd
            induction can be Lrde to worl@. conrii3-tently.  In outline@ It ' @ild
            :Lnclude:
                     a* Working out otand=d disL7tdaed in(luction techtxiquca
                  for covert op'w"ationi 'based on the polygraph, the clectro-
                2  encepl-sologrtxph and the clectra@-cvxdiarre-ph as a beginn-in.,?,.
                     b. Sell?cting fo-Li; to   stiff eciploycc-s vith field
                  experience r-nd uocful lnnglmgc 1-.ncwlcdge P.3 candidatca for
                  ti-ilan2g only in these techaiquca under t@ic directioit of oue
                  pmfessional h-ypmtict (wbo can be n con.,2nilt&nt).
                     c. Applying tL-&,oe techniqtieu In a continuizL,-, serlc3. of
                  test op-o-r-ations nt cne or more field a-titic,.is *.elcctcl cn @@llic
                  banig of a flexibly-miiuled chief dillin,3 in a positi-v-- wu7 to
                  mtpport such an erfort,, the lang=ge abilities of the candioatca,
                  u=bers of lrdtrenoua agents or potential ag@cnts beina poly-
                                                 -timia dur@.2rlg wliich logically
                  gmpl*d or receiving medical examina
                  an elcetro-cucerhalogrnm or clectro-cnrdi"sgrmm --ould be trlteu.
                       d. Uailig the rilc oo rceson froa tl2is point    a
                  followin,7, critcrin a'Aoul(I be nppli(-tll limrcvcr: (a) @lould a
                  propo-ir-,d tcr;", 1),c operrtticni.,illy ui3t-f'u), if it sticeecdc.47  (b) Vlould
                  it contribute to o@ur over--all kiiawledgi o,'L' hyl)notic cciitrol nmi

                                              29
                   it3 inl)crcnt lir-.itritionn? 1,@oul(I it lirlp in the dcvclor@-
                   Lnerit or proving of n n-lw pre-t,@,tit or    infliction't
                   (d) In the event of a failure, irculd tlic'ensuirw, 'flzp"
      2             boor-@cx-ang spirmt the CIA either In a seci)xiti or a pre-stik;,@,
                   r
                    eme?  (e) Woula It ty--Ip ul to develop or ovnrccr.:-,r-- n cvntcr-
                   mens3ure?
                   7-  l@xtraqrdinary accurity for this I)ro(,,mri is indictitc-il not
              only becauze =ny  &ctors-and lnymen atill disbelieve the  recLlit7
              of b7pnotic.pLcnamena and the Aacney mioit be r-nde to lr)ok rnti-,cr
              silly In the pxiblic eye foi,          to use li,
                                  2                           .,Tn,ools; but alr>o
              because sure kr@owledge by the olipositioil of   vc* were til)Out coiild
              lend th4@m into effective counter-measures the nature of wliieb we
                    t nov forcuee.
                       We r,.ust constantly recall thnt we nre denling wil@-h sn
               intricate, (lynnl-dc psycliclogical plicncrienon wliich Eippenrs to 'uc.-
               Intimately conncctr.-d vith intangibles of interpersonal relzticns.
               It would be foolish to expect conc;iatent success in a push-buttoii
               sense*  By its nature, howevcr, crae successful alcration in-ml,;inZ
 14 4;,:;      hypnotic Wliience  on-er (ony) a senior official. of a foreiga govern-
                      ld richly reptly us for n CE%-r lorucr cf'fort than arr4-tliln(l,
               mea cou
                cot3teMla-tc-d by th2e @rrater of -thin I.-,ipor.
               V.   P T.'C (I T I CT'@-)
                     1.  rut on a dcmcmtraticii of ll,,rpnorts 1;1-'f@cificf,'117 dct;iL'pc'd
                to shoi _ros@-iblc rll@-dlicntion to covvrt opcrnti(,,n,3.  'flic! follc,.rir.(,,
                Agency officials sbold initially v-ltm--so it to entisfy ther-,;clvcs
                                        POMM@
                                              _17

                                               30
               tb
                   atat--t.:i-.zits in this P-apcr Etre Jun     V--
                     2.  Aijthm-ize develovmcnt in detail of tlle    field--crient-ed
               operntional prograva ske-tclq4 nbove.
                         'O'clect  2                    a an ii3i@t'-Iitl tent arc.,n Pn@'
                           a alit@le lndlyiduftl in the operntioruil ciiiiin-oC-cor-mrncl
                as dimctor of the procratu.
                          Get no a re-npprniacpl dnte Pith@:r oiit,- year fron the
  4              the  firct tomm orrives in the test n"rca or sooncr if the dircctcr
                of  tLiL- progrn.-a fecl3 'tl-zt the tert ;rogrt).m h--a fniled or ii3 failinr,.
   ir

