                                 ;11,10T
                                'L  @AIIDUTl RELATIVE TO TITL U',jl-" OF TD
                                      11-T INTE11ROr,'YATIOII.
                 A.                   OF TI@IL [)RUG
                      This substance can be administered to the subject       eitlier
                 by injectirir2, it in cigarettes to be smoked by cubject,     or   by
                 placing it in food %,71iieh the subject is certal.-i to consume.
                      The use of cigarettes    Is somewhat unsatisfactory    as   the
                 dosage cannot be acei-irately controlled.  T'llils resiilto from
                 the variety in sriolcing liabits, since gorie r)ersons inli2nle
                 deeply, some f3liEhtly  and  some  none.at  all.  It  is  riecessary
                 for the impregnated portion of the cigarette to be burning and
                 the amolte tlierefrom.inhaled by the subject in order to produce
                 tl7,e desired effect.
                      -@;lien the atibstance I.- placed ii-i food ,i,-iich 2the ,iubject is
                 certain to colisun-e the dosage can be more carefully-conlu-r'olled.
                 Since the  substance  is  odorless,  colorless  arid  tasteless,  it
                 cannot be detected in the food.  TI-ie capacity of various neoule
                 to absorb or  tolerate  this  drug  varies.  I  have  found  that  a
                 may.inum of 3/100 c.c. in sufficient to prod2uce the desired
                 affect on even the riost roolstant    si-ibject wlien'@-,idn3.ni3tgred
                 ln@.ornally.   '-@71tic(, sorie prrsons do not l,ave a,,, -rea@ a -tolerance
                 aq others, It is ,iu,!-c-ested that the drtic, be admlii.l..'3tered in
                 s5ucce,qsive doc,,.,s of 1/000 c.c. until tlp closired  eff'oct is
                 reached.  The  operator  Is  cuationed  that  internal   dosaf
                                                                              ,,,o may

                  take as long, as 45 minutes to take effect, and that he
                  should ri6t become Impatient and thereby i7
                                                              .,ive azi overdose
                  of the dru  in atterrptinc to expedite the process
                             r
                  B.  TLCIrilIqui:
                       If the operator will   r-emember that the dru2g roughly
                  produce's the effect of mental Intoxication without:.the symptoms
                  Of pl-lysical intoxication produced by alchbol he will have a
                  practical catinate.of the effect of the drug.  In order-to
                  obtain desirable results it is necessary to "0(3"u- the 9tnCelf
                  so the subject-will not realize he is 2the object of interro-
                  r,ation.  The drug will not nroduce desired effect v.,Iien the
                  subject is on Iiii iuard a,- the r(,,qult of norr-al apprehension.
                  The interrogation ,3h.)uld be carried olit 'UliroiiGh protoxt a,nd
                  Indirection.  The   technique used should be comparable to that
               2   adopted bv investigators   in a  ropinf," job.'  This means the
                  subject's  confidence  should be gained tliro,,irli subterfuge and
                  pretext by the operator  prior to the Fttte--rnt to --aln the
                  desired infor-,lat.Lon.
                      Outstarl(lin[-, cliarac@'eristics of the drui3@'art- tha accentuat;io2n
                  of subject'.9 Dersonality.  If suLJect is a- brnF.Cart the d-2-,t3
                  will increase thts trait.  If '.in is a nen,,3un1lit tlll.,q c)iai,acter-
                  istic ,,iill be eKeLECeratod.  The drug brcodg lrresponolb'Llity
                  and relaxes inhibitions.  It causes a person under t1he in-
                  fluence to become excessively inlverested In a topic of

                                                                               ---------- -
                   conversation to the point vrh,-re lie will insist on giving
                   his viewpoint on subjects under d-trcu3oion.  Appetite on'd
                   t'Altrst will sl-,@arply Increase. It is      to ncco,,-,ipan-.7
                   adz-ninisti,atlon of i;lie dru,- viith tlap c,)ri:iumptlpn of alcoholic
                   drinks for tl-ie reason if an.y unusual sensations are experienced
                   uy subjpct they will be  attributed  to  the  alcohol  and  not  to
                   a--iotlior cauze. Alcohol does not appear to affect  tl-io  use  of
                   the drug althou-Ii, of course, excessive corisumption of liquor
                   would produce a dual Intoxication.
                        Overdosage will not have serious physical results,,     but
                   will make tlie.subject aware some foreie;ri substance hd3 been
                   admirlir,tered to lilin.  Upoii receipt of an o-.,erdosage the
                   subject mill e2xp(,rlerice verti@Lo and faint uiid bocome un-
                   conscious for aeveral minutes.     Consciousness will then-be
                   recovered arrj tlie lubject will quickly.return  to  normal@,-  but
                   lie will be full-y aware that sorrethlri;-
                                                            liao liappcned to lilm2.
                        The ad-ii.-itstrati.-)n'of Llifi drug is u3.oleg-- in a formal
                 "inquiry and can only I)o ilso(,- sticconr@full@- Ets aii ticcompan,,,ment
                   ti tl,.o ron(,ral "ro@,ing" tocl-u-ilque.  A basis Qf trust and
                   friond:6j'tilp.inu3t bo establisliod by IV-lie opera,i-@)r before
                   adi-,iini;Bteriri@,- the dru[;.

