                  We recently obtai,.    a small supply of an interesti--     subs-'%-lance in
            the  cannabinol series',     h a-o-oears to be extr--rely  potent.  I  have  nov
            given 11 stfo4ects dose!      1 to 2
                          i                      .5 mg. of this drug.  The first +.vo
            patien4,s promptl,              'ihe effects a2s being like those of marihuana
                              y. ider-,-  ed
            and
                 ., naturally,  all   patients since t-e first ",,-wo have expected ma-ihusna-
            like  effects.  Patients  begin  to  report  the  subjective  effects  vithin  2
            to   4hours. Effects appear to be  most  -Drominent  6  to  8  hours  after  the
            drug  is adnini tered and are still 2-oresent  24  to  36  hours  later;  and  in
                  -cases  even  longer.  Description  of  the  subjective  effects  is  very
            sme
            vague, exce-ot that the subjects are very positive they resemble t@lhose of
            marihuana., -They say the effects of I mg. are equal to one or two ciga-rettes
            of the best marihuana,  except  that  they  appear  slowly  and  persist  for  a
           2 very long period of time.  They are described as consisting of a sensation
            of mental relaxation acco.=anied        4ever, by "physical" tension., increased
                                                ., ha,
            appreciation of music, jokes,, ai@d other things.  The characteristic
            behavior observed in marihuana smokers (gig@,ling, silliness) has not been
                                                  2          CD
            seen                   -en'al situation has not been conducive to the aplearance
                 .. but the experim  11                                    L.
            of  such  behavior.  No  hallucinations,  perceptual  distortion.,  etc..,  have
            been reported.
                  With larger doses   (2 to 2.5 mg.) the sy=tcms becam-- quite     unpleasant
            in 6 of the 11 subjects2 6 to 8 hours after gaministra4t"ion.  The      unpleasant
            symptoms i.,lcluaed di2;iiqess., feeling of &reat'A weakness, marL---& dzc@@;siness.,
            nausea and vomiting.    Weakness has perslsted for 48 to 72 hours after
            e4 rn -1 n- -.'6s';'-Iration of the drug.  One -Datieri2t fainted on going to the bathroom
            the morning after having received a 2-mg. dose.
                  ITeu:rolcaical examination.-in these patients  so f ar has been nega4k.,.i,,re
            with the dose used.  Ho,4ever  -ait couli-not be     tested  in  sore   patients
            who became so weak. they refused to get out of bel.  There is a very
            defin-;-'We tendency f2or the pulse rate to  become  rapid  and  a  tendency  for
            the blood p.-essu-te to fall.  @i"h6 results suggest that some cardiovascular
            disturbance
                        ,, possibly poso.-ural hyuotension, may occur.  I hope to inves4k,,itTate
            this in t&-.e i=--diate future. Beca7ase o@--' the  appearance  of  these  toxic
       0     reacA4,,ions, 1 an not plqrning to increase the dose  beyond  2.6  mg.,  in  the
            i=iediate future.
                  It is note-.,crthy I.-hav- ','"a patien'us sho-i th-- characteristic marihuana
            fauies) vhich consisr. chiefly of marked conj=ctival reddening and
            pseudop".osis.

